This is Jockel Podcast number 290 with echo Charles and me,
Dr. Willink. Good evening echo. Good evening.
Within 24 hours, I had ordered the special operations units to assemble in North Carolina.
On the seal side,
all were senior enlisted from the same seal squadron,
all were hand-picked by the seal commander,
all had extensive combat experience.
The aviation crews were equally experienced and also hand-picked.
But none of them knew why they were being asked to come to North Carolina on such short notice.
The following day, as we ushered the members of the brave team into the conference room at our North Carolina location,
I could see a look of annoyance on their faces.
By this time, I had briefed my boss Admiral Eric Olson on the Bin Laden mission.
Olson, along with the undersecretary of defense for intelligence,
Mike Vickers and several CIA senior officers were also present in the conference room.
The operators,
body language was unmistakable.
Clearly, they thought they had been dragged out of Virginia Beach and Fort Campbell to participate in some kind of no notice exercise,
just to impress the brass.
I offered some short welcoming remarks and then turned over the briefing to a CIA officer.
He began by handing out non-disclosure forms.
I watched with some amusement as the body language began to change.
Rarely, were non-disclosure forms required for exercises, even sensitive ones.
They took a few minutes before the forms were signed and collected.
Then another CIA official stepped up on the small stage and began to brief the target.
The operators shifted in their chairs,
sitting up to focus on the slides on the screen.
The CIA officer began.
Gentlemen, for the past several months, the CIA has been tracking an individual we call the Pacer.
Embedded in the slide was a link.
The CIA officer clicked on the link and a video played on the screen.
Everyone watched as the Pacer moved around the compound at AC1.
We have reason to believe that the Pacer is Osama Bin Laden.
At the sound of Bin Laden's name, there were silence in the room.
I could see a number of the seals glancing around at each other as if to ask,
Are they screwing with us or is this for real?
The briefing went on for another 30 minutes.
After the CIA analyst finished, I pushed away from my table, stood up,
and made sure everyone was clear on why we were here.
Gentlemen, I told them the president has asked us to develop a raid option
to capture or kill Bin Laden.
For the past several weeks, a small team has been planning the mission,
but now we have to find out whether the plan is executable.
We have less than three weeks to test and rehearse the plan.
At the end of that time, I have to report back to the president
on the viability of the mission.
There was no emotion from the operators, no smiles, no acknowledgement
of the magnitude of the operation.
Now, it was all business.
I continued, the agency has built a mock-up of the compound
just a mile from here.
You have two days to work through the movements on target.
After that, we will move to another location out west
to do the full dress rehearsals.
I offered the other senior officers an opportunity to say a few words,
but they recognized that this was about the operators not a time
to wax philosophically about the importance of the mission.
I will turn you over to your boss,
and you guys can work out the details.
Any questions?
There were none.
All right, I said,
let's get to work.
And that right there is an excerpt of the book C Stories,
which was written by Admiral William McCraven.
Admiral McCraven served 37 years in the Navy,
and held just about every position of leadership.
There is from seal platoon commander all the way up to four star
commander of all United States special operations forces.
He oversaw thousands and thousands of combat operations around the globe
during his time in service, including some of the most important
operations, and perhaps the most important
operation in the history of US special operations,
the killing of Osama bin Laden.
And all the while, even with that incredible burden of command,
Admiral McCraven was always connected with the troops.
As an example, he stopped by my little base and bagged
and said hi to this common platoon commander as we geared up for a mission
and asked Ernest questions about what we were doing and how we were doing it.
And it listened intently as I explained my little part of the war.
He was always present, thoughtful, respected, balanced,
and as good of a representative of the seal community as we could have hoped for.
And we have the honor of having him with us here tonight to share his vast experiences
and lessons learned.
Admiral, thank you for joining us.
That's from the book Seastories.
Now you've written four books thus far.
Seastories make your bed, your latest one, which was called The Hero Code,
and then spec ops, case studies and special operations, warfare and practice.
I'll probably spend some time, well, I'm going a little bit,
I'll go into the, go, go, go a ray of books that you've written at some point.
And Seastories is sort of, well, you were saying that's about as close to memoirs we're going to get from you.
I guess this podcast, but now I have to do this.
I'm going to dive into Seastories first and because it relates some of your early experiences.
Here's the deal.
I'm going to just read little tiny chunks of this book because you read your own audiobooks, which is awesome.
So people can go out and buy those, but in order to maybe trigger us and some other conversations and some stuff that's not in the books, I'll set it up.
And I always like to start at the beginning and find out, you know, who these people are,
where they came from, how they ended up the way they did and you got a pretty good, pretty good interesting background.
And with that, I'm going to go to the book here.
Talk to your dad.
When I asked him years later, why he joined the military.
He said that as a boy, he watched soldiers march through the streets of his hometown of Marston, Missouri and board a train bound for the trenches of France.
His father and army surgeon was one of those men.
He knew then that he wanted to be a soldier.
After graduating from aviation officer school at Brookfield in San Antonio, Texas, he received orders to the 39th fighter squadron, eight air force.
The 39th was part of the first American contingent to be posted in the United Kingdom.
At the time, the Americans were still working to build a fighter aircraft that could complete in aerial combat against the German measurement.
So when dad arrived in England, he and the other pilots of the 309th were given British spitfires.
The spits equipped with a powerful Rolls Royce engines, new guns and sleek aerodynamics were good enough to go toe to toe with the Germans.
Dad flew the spitfire throughout the war, going on to fight in the campaigns in North Africa, Sicily, Solerano, and eventually at the Normandy invasion.
He registered two confirmed kills during the war, but would himself be shot down over France in 1943.
The saga of his escape and invasion from France back to England was told many times during our posting in France, but not by dad who rarely talked about his wartime service.
But by the French resistance fighter who helped him back to freedom and now lived near us on the outskirts of Paris.
So your dad's freaking war hero coming out again.
Well I think they were all heroes back then.
I mean, you think about this greatest generation.
And I was forced to grow up as a kid in San Antonio, Texas, that all of my dad's friends even back then had served in the Air Force or the Army Air Corps or the Army.
And they all fought in World War II.
So you know, you experience these, you kind of remarkable stories from these guys.
But of course that generation, both my father and my mother, you know, they grow up during the Depression.
They grow up as children of World War I, as I mentioned, my dad watched his father go off to serve in World War I.
And my grandfather also, he was young enough that he came back and served in World War II.
So as a combat surgeon.
And then of course all the men go off to World War II.
So yeah, they had these stories.
And I think the stories helped him.
One of the reasons that I wrote the book, Sea Stories, was because the stories that my father told, I know helped him and that group deal with the challenges that they had in life.
Stories help you do that, as you well know.
And frankly, writing the stories and the book Sea Stories kind of helped me. It was cathartic. You know, you put these stories down on paper. You remember them. You remember the people. You remember your emotions.
And it's frankly helpful to get those stories out sometimes.
Yeah, so did your dad stay in the Army?
So if you're a career Army guy, the, he joined the Army Air Corps, which became the Air Force.
So yeah, he spent 26 years in the Air Force retired as Colonel.
And flew until he had a heart attack, something about the risky and cigarettes.
And had a heart attack while we were over in France.
And so that took him all flying status.
They sent him back to the Fort Sam Houston, actually, to Brook Air Force base or to Lackland Air Force base to Brook Medical Center there.
Recovered and then retired out of Lackland.
And you were growing up. You were, what was your behavior like?
I know, you got a pretty good story in there that's, you know, you obviously had a mischievous side, which I guess is just what we're born with.
But you're also a really good athlete.
Yeah, I was a mischievous as a good way to describe it.
And to your point, I think that was the nature of a lot of kids back then.
I grew up born in 1955, but kind of grew up in the 60s.
And this was a time when, you know, the movies were about spies.
You know, I mean, James Bond came out, there was a spy on TV and the man from Uncle.
And even though, you know, I grew up in Texas and it was about Cowboys and Indian sort of thing.
The spy culture back then really kind of, I think, grabbed the young kids, certainly grabbed me.
So yeah, you know, we were always looking at missions to go on.
And you know, when I was, when I was, when I was a preteen, of course, a couple of those got me in some serious trouble.
And yeah, I was good athlete, but I was small. I didn't really start growing until late in high school.
So my dad happened to have been a professional athlete. He played football for the Cleveland Rams running back for the Cleveland Rams.
And that's where he made all this money.
Yeah, I think he told me they paid him $120 a week, which was good money back then.
And then he would get $10 for doing weedies commercials.
So he seemed like he was making pretty good money back then, but he and a bunch of buddies saw that,
and the late 30s early 40s that war was brewing. And they, I think he told me one time he and four of his friends on the football team just got up, drove to California and signed up for the Army Air Corps.
So you're, what about grades? Were you interested in school? Did you care about school?
Yeah, yeah, of course I cared about school. I'm not sure of school care. I'm much about me.
I was an average student. I was an average student at the elementary school in junior high school and high school and in college.
But I worked hard. I worked hard to get the grades. I didn't have a lot of skills in math and science.
And of course, when I look back on my college career, I mean, I changed major four times. It wasn't until I got into journalism, which is what I ended up graduating in,
that I found out I had a little bit of a talent for writing. So I mean, I couldn't do, yeah, I started off in pre-med in college. That didn't work out so well.
I went to a county and that worked out even worse. And then I went to the news reporting and then finally in the broader arena of journalism.
And so when you're going to college, did you, did you have a military career in mind at that point?
Again, again, I had watched my dad and his friends and the one thing I loved about the military was just the camaraderie.
Even after my dad retired, we lived in a residential area in San Antonio called Windcrest. And Windcrest is where a lot of the retired military and a lot of the active duty military lived.
So it was almost like living on base housing. And so all the kids had some sort of connection to the military.
And it was just a great environment to grow up in. And I remember the young age, I decided that kind of, my dad didn't push me. This wasn't the great Santini sort of thing.
But I just enjoyed watching how my parents interacted with their friends. And I said, yeah, that's kind of what I want to do.
And my dad wanted me to be a pilot. And my mom wanted me to be a doctor. The doctor was not going to work out. She quickly found out.
But she did get me an ROTC scholarship. She had to do all the work. Again, back then, I don't think I had the discipline to do all the paperwork. My mom worked all the paperwork and said, you know, go to this interview, sign this, do this.
And I got an ROTC scholarship to the University of Texas at Austin and that kind of put me on the path.
How did you heard about the seal teams at this point?
I saw interestingly enough, my sister was dating an army green beret. And this was probably 1971-72.
And of course, the movie, the green beret with John Wayne had come out. And I love the movie. Never heard a seal. It's a death point in time.
And so this army officer comes a young captain comes to pick her up. And this was at a time when it was very unusual because if you're not more still going on, you weren't supposed to wear your class age, you know, your uniform out in public back then.
But he comes to pick her up and he's in a uniform. And he's a green beret.
And so my sister notoriously late, so I'm kind of entertaining the guy. I'm about 16, 17 years old, I guess.
And he says, well, what are you going to do? And I said, well, you know, I'm looking at going into the Navy and ROTC. He says, well, then you need to be a Navy seal.
I'd never heard of Navy seals. And he had just come back from a touring Vietnam, he goes, let me tell you.
Seals of the best guys in the Navy. If you want to do something special, you go be a Navy seal, I'm thinking, this is an army green beret, telling me to go be a Navy seal.
And that really is kind of what's spurred me. And then there was one article back then, not like it was today, of course.
Back then, you couldn't find out about seals, but I got on microfish in the library. I found one article called men with green faces.
Kind of it's a classic, but it was in some old men's magazine, you know, back then they used to have these men's magazines and adventure magazines sort of thing.
And I must have read that article a hundred times trying to find out what it was like, of course, there was nothing on buzz. It was all about the teams.
Interestingly enough, about probably 10 years, 15 years later, I found that article, the microfish, you know, photocopy of it.
And of course, I knew all the guys in the article. It was Ed Bowen and it was Bob Mayberry and it was Bob Gorman. I mean, guys that now I was kind of serving with that we're actually in the article. So it was a interesting.
Now, you made, you, you talk about this and make your bed. You, you go to visit buds. Was this like your junior year?
So I was, yeah, it was between my junior and senior year.
And, you know, we had some time off in the summer. And so I wanted to go see what what buds was all about.
So I took a flight to San Diego and I show up at the compound, which is, I guess, they're demolishing it now, but so this was 1976.
And I show up and I, and I go to the court of that kind of unannounced and I, I tell them that I'd like to see something I talk about going through buds training.
So the lieutenant who was running at the time is guy named Doug Youth, Vietnam vet, very distinguished, great officer.
And so I'm waiting outside and I, I looked down the hallway and I remember this very vitally and I, I see this guy down the hallway and, of course, you remember how it's set up, you know, the officers are off to one side and we, back then with the, always his posters.
And they were, you know, Vietnam aeroposters, you know, manly men doing manly things, me guys with bandlears on, guys in the mud with the stoner.
And the sky is kind of looking up at these posters, you know, kind of, you know, longingly and, and looking at what I'm thinking of myself, you have got to be kidding me.
I mean, this guy, you know, he was thin kind of frail and had a little bit of a mop of long hair and I thought he was a dependent, you know, but he's kind of looking up and I'm thinking, man, does this guy really think he could be an AV seal?
Doesn't he know, I mean, maybe seals, post looked like me, you know, six foot two eyes of blue big bronzy guys.
And so I was watching this guy, you know, I'm waiting and thinking, I feel sorry for this guy if he really thinks he could make it through a seal training.
So a few months later, I get called into the youth's office and I'm sitting there talking to Doug youth and out of the corner of my eye, I can see this guy kind of walking across in front of the doorway and finally, Doug youth stops me and he goes, hey, Bill, hold us there.
I want to introduce you to somebody.
He said, Tommy, Tommy, come in here.
So this is Tommy Norris. He's the last seal middle of honor recipient from Vietnam, and of course, as you all know, Jaco, Tommy, one of the toughest guys that ever went through seal training.
And it just reinforced the fact, and of course, when you get in seal training, you realize this, they ain't about how big you are, they ain't about how fast you are.
I mean, Tommy Norris, one of the toughest guys, because, you know, he had the heart to big enough to make it through the toughness, the determination, everything that we're looking for in seals.
And so a lot of guys who go through the think it's all about, you know, how fast you can run and how much you can bench press and they're missing the point.
The Tommy Norris is the world to the ones that rule the teams.
Crazy how many guys with a big bench or a great runtime quit.
Yeah. It's nuts. Right. So all the early on, right, we had this, we had two guys that look like weight lifters.
I don't think they made it through the first week.
Yeah, it's not what you're looking for, you know.
And Lieutenant Huth, who checked you in the first phase, he was the, he was the seal of all of Buds when I went.
Oh, he's the captain in charge of the set of great guys.
So, so you end up going back finish your senior year,
and then you got, you got to order something.
Was it hard to get to go to Buds then?
It wasn't again, back then, Buds was actually a course at the Naval Enthibia School.
So it was not its own command. It was just a course that was running at the Naval Enthibia School.
And when I got orders, I was at the University of Texas.
I remember when my orders came in and it didn't say basically under water demolition seal training.
It had a course number on it.
And it said something about explosive training, but that was about it.
And so I didn't even know whether these were the right orders to go to Buds.
So I'm calling around, but again, back then, nobody knew about seal training.
So, you know, one of the officers had to call the detailer who back then,
our detailers and for your audience, the detailers are the guys that, that send you,
give you the orders where to go.
Well, we didn't have a seal detailer back then. It was an EOD and explosive ordinance disposal officer that managed the seal community.
So yeah, he said, I don't know. It's it's the course number. So of course, I show up turned out it.
It was the right place to go.
We just had billposey on.
Yeah.
And he showed up to Buds, whatever.
Course number it was.
Same thing. And he thought it was a course he asked, like, hey, do I need a backpack for the books?
And I'm like, what do you think he need books for?
He says for the course that I thought that had no idea what he was doing.
He thought he was going to go and he's got, thought he's going to some kind of advanced dive,
dive, right card hat dive score or something like that.
And I was also thinking about Dick Thompson, a guy named Dick Thompson on who was a green brain Vietnam.
He's so he joined the army voluntarily.
Then he volunteered for special forces. Then he volunteered for OCS when it became an officer.
And I said, hey, was it hard to, you know, when you, was it hard to get those billets?
And he goes, no, because it was Vietnam.
They're like, oh, you want to be an officer? Cool. Go ahead.
You want to be in special forces? Cool. Go ahead. Are you on joining the army? Everything was easy.
Well, and I don't, I said, all you had to do is pass the PT test. And of course, you know, the PT test is not all that hard.
You pass PT test. You get orders to, to buds.
I mean, I think it was that easy back then. And again, I can't, I can't talk to the naval academy guys.
But for those of us in our T.C. Hey, if you raised your hand and you wanted to go, you were probably going to get a billet.
Did you have any idea what you're getting into?
None, none whatsoever. Again, there were, there were no books, there were no movies, there was nothing on seal training.
I knew nothing about what we were going to do. I just knew that I wasn't going to quit.
They were going to have to kill me if they were going to stop me from getting through.
How is your water competency? Yeah, good. I mean, I was good swimmer.
Okay. And I've been scuba diving since I was 13. So I learned dive yarn.
So the water, I mean, I thought we'd actually spend more time in that course. We did spend a lot of time swimming.
But I was always good swimmer. So that was not an issue.
Yeah, I think that's a big, that's a big problem for guys that show up from Iowa.
They grew up wrestling and weightlifting or whatever, but they didn't swim. That's a problem.
Or particularly swimming in the surf. I mean, those are different.
You can get in the pool and make pretty good laps, but there were a lot of kids that came in with me that all of a sudden, you know, you see the surf, particularly in the winter time off Coronado.
And you know, you get 10, 12 foot breakers. They're like, well, never seen that before.
So that was a bit of a shock for him. I've been your class leader was was Daniel Stewart.
And I'll still want to find his officers. I ever served him with. And Daniel had been rolled back. He had the as you recall and it towards the end of the first phase of training.
Or maybe it was right before Hellweek.
We did cast and recovery. So you take an inflatable boat small and you tie it up along. What we had was called a PL, which is a little small boat back then.
And then you hook the old classic frog men and world war two. You hook your arm through the sling. Well, and of course, so hook in his arm through the sling.
The guy caught the arm too low, ripped out his bicep. And so Daniel had to get rolled back. Fortunately for us he ends up being a class leader.
And he was lieutenant J. J. The other officers in the class. We were all in since.
And Daniel had been in the fleet. So he was already a surface warfare officer, Naval Academy graduate.
Exactly the guy we needed to frankly get through training. Again, I knew nothing about what I was stepping into. And neither did the other two officers that were with us.
We were all kind of bright and bushy tail. But, but Daniel had already been through it and had some great great ideas on how we were going to make it through. And he's the one to got us through.
He was my first commanding officer at T. O. T. One.
And he was, I guess in the modern term that we would say we would say he was jacked. He was like still is.
And because he was a gymnast, wasn't he a gymnast? So he was the first human being because I didn't know anything about gymnastics.
But he was out on the old pull-up bar behind the T. O. T. One. And he was doing muscle ups on the pull-up bar.
I didn't even know what that was. And I remember thinking, damn, I got some work to do over here.
That's a new guy. The instructors. So you've got, I mean, this is first of all, they're basically unchange. There's no supervision.
I don't know a double supervision, right?
Well, I think there was. But of course, as as trainees, you don't think there is.
And you think they have the latitude to do anything to you. So I think that was part of the psychological advantage I had was if there was, in fact, the double supervision, which I think there was.
I think they had certain criteria. We didn't know it. So I think today, again, the students going through because they have such a good understanding, they know the instructors aren't going to kill them.
I can be honest with you. I'm not sure we knew that back then.
And some of them seem to mean enough to do that. But they're all Vietnam vets.
You know, these salty old crusty old guys and of course, as a young kid, I mean, you look up to these Vietnam vets as we should.
Great combat experience, great stores and you wanted to be like these guys. And of course, they wanted you to be tough enough, mentally tough enough, physically tough enough to join them in the teams.
And you knew that was a standard you were fighting for. So it was great to have those guys be your instructors because, you know, we looked up to them so much and we just wanted to do the best by them.
What was. Was it like just the normal kind of 80 75 or 80% of nutrition rate? Yeah, something. When we started with, I went back and had to check the numbers.
We started with 110 guys. Lee sets with a roster show. We ended up with 33.
So right about the same nutrition. And yet 33 back then was a large class.
The class before us, I think, had finished with the 18 or 20, which was about normal back then. Again, I attribute a lot of our success to that, a steward who managed to keep the class together during the tough times.
And they were actually very impressed. Remember the instructors watched us very closely because we got a lot of guys through a hell week. I think we ended up getting almost 55 guys through hell week. And we lost a lot of guys after that.
But still ending up with 33 guys was a large class. And the instructors were trying to figure out how did you guys do that because we need to get more guys through.
Well, the answer was, had great leadership and that always helps when you're in challenging situations.
Did I know you talk a little bit about in one of the books about instructor faculty who ended up being my first master chief at COT1.
And he's a guy that really instilled, well, the professionalism because in the SEAL teams, especially I would say more so back then, but there was like a professional side.
And there was an equally strong sort of hell's angels sort of sort of spirit that you could jump into. And like great guys on both sides.
I think that match you faculty for me sort of leaned me in kind of my group. At least put some level of, hey, you got to be square away. You got to present yourself. You know, this is the military wearing the navy like all those little things which you go to some other.
Some other deeper darker AOs and the SEAL teams. There was none of that going on. And I just appreciated that fact and it like I said, it had a had a good influence on me because when you're young and impressionable.
I just wanted to be a good seal. And if you told me a good seal was having a good haircut and wearing a square away uniform. Okay, that's what I'm doing.
Luckily people like that were around.
Yeah, and I think you nailed it, Jack. I mean, that was consistent with what I thought saw with faculty throughout his career. And as we talked before the podcast, you know, Mike and I became very good friends. We were neighbors and and you'll invest a and he and Daniel Stewart stayed very, very good friends.
So Mike was actually our proctor again for your listeners. So the proctor was the the senior enlisted that really was in charge of your phase. So he was our first phase proctor.
And that was really important because it kind of sets the tone for the rest of the three phases. But faculty as the proctor and Daniel Stewart is the class leader. You know, they worked well together. And faculty would, you know, give us little tips on, you know, how to get through certain evolutions and events kind of pass through Daniel Stewart.
So that team, that team work between faculty as a proctor and Stewart as the as a class leader was helpful. But Mike was always professional. I mean, he was perfect. And as you know, the instructors loved to harass you.
And you know, some of them harass you with a little bit of a mean spirit. Some of them have a good sense of humor. And of course, faculty could always do it with a little bit of a twinkle in his eye.
I mean, you, that's not say you weren't suffering the pain. You were suffering the pain. But there was always a little smile, a little bit of a twinkle in his eye. And you knew that he was going to, you know, get you through this evolution, even though he was harassed it.
Yeah, the thing I think I learned.
Well, again, never really broke it down like this, but this sort of professional side versus this kind of hell's angel side. I think what I what what I learned from faculty was that what we were there to do was.
Was do the do the mission of the country, right? And if you wanted to do that, that's what you were there to do to kill bad guys to go out and execute operations. What's the look? This is the 90s when I stood up there was I missed the first call for, but as far as I could tell, if you wanted to do that.
If you wanted to actually do the missions for the country, then you had to be professional, right? And that was the connection that I kind of made and and by the way, you know, the idea of being a frog man.
What could what could possibly Trump doing being a good operator for being a frogman is nothing that Trump said. It's not any of that other stuff that you can that there's plenty of in the sealed teams, but there's there's nothing that Trump's hey.
I'm a good I want to be a good operator. I want to be able to do my job well. I want to go out and execute missions. And that professionalism I think is a I mean it was a key component for me and my career and something that I think people like mastery faculty embedded in enough people that it it carries on.
No, you know, you're exactly right. The fact of matter is there was a little bit of the the duality of if you will of the kind of the health angels and the professionals, but even the health angels understood that if you were going to do a complex seal mission,
but you better have the highest standards possible. You better know your business. You better rehearse it to the end degree. You are not going to come in and be cavalier about people's lives or about making sure that we're going to be successful on a mission. So I mean again, I was fortunate. I had a guy named Lieutenant John Wright and John was a young probably incident or Lieutenant J. G in Vietnam, but when I got to underwater demolition team 11, John kind of took me under his wing.
And it was all about the professionalism and it first was okay, incident, McRaven, you need to learn the basics. You need to know everything you can find out about demolition, about parachuting, about weapons you better be able to break apart every single up because John Wright could do that.
Now you know you had that expectation if you wanted to see your listed guys, but his expectation was you can't lead the man under you. If you don't know the skill set, it equally as well. At the end of the day you never know it quite as good as the unless to guys do, but you want to make sure you've put in the effort.
And so John instilled in me, hey, you got to work hard every single day. You've got to earn their respect every single day. The day you think you don't have to earn their respect that you become so senior or you become so entitled, then you're the wrong person to be leading.
And that was instilled in me at a very young age. Fortunately, my faculty and I ended up working together a number of times. Later, he became my command master chief and until your point, Jaco, I mean he was a guy that set the standards high and expected everybody to meet the standards or exceed the standards.
And the standards were the standards and I don't care whether you were his friend or somebody he didn't like if you couldn't meet the standards, then you were going to be a good team.
Before we jump in a UDT 11, it sounded like you almost had a damn he low crash at the end of Buds.
We did. Yeah, so it was the very last day of Buds train. And this was the next day we were going to graduate back at the time. You know, when you finished Buds training, that's when you had the big graduation, you didn't get your trident, but all the parents would come out.
So this was the day before the graduation. And the last evolution was helicopter cast and recovery. And so the parents that had come out for the graduation, the following day, all showed up on Turner Field and Turner Field is in there here in Coronado where the helicopter would land. They put some bleachers out there for all the parents to sit in.
And of course the instructor who at the time was Lieutenant Moeke Martin, you know, makes the parents think that, you know, your your sons are about to be Navy frogmen, you know, and this is a, this is a really tough evolution. It's a dangerous evolution.
And so he kind of built up a high-pull little bit for all the parents. When in fact, you know, helicopter cast recovery is a pretty straightforward operation.
And all the adults do it actually were the first two sticks. So we board the 46, the Navy 46. And so we go out picked up off Turner Field. We fly out over the bay.
And the ideas, you know, they drop each stick off and that stick. I think we're at seven eight guys in the stick.
And so Daniel's the first stick out. And I'm the first guy in the second stick. So I get dropped off. Well, the needle comes back around picks up Daniel's guys picks up me. I'm the first guy in the stick. And as I get into the helicopter, I sit down on the, on the Ben seat.
And yeah, this doesn't look quite right. I'm up to my waist and water. And I'm thinking, I don't think he goes supposed to be doing.
Of course, as I look in the cockpit here, the pilots there, fighting the helo, the, the crew chief. We had actually landed, we lost power in one of the engines. So the helicopter had settled hard into the water.
And one of the guys who was about to be picked up through the hell hole gets landed on. And so now the crew chief, he's running back trying to make sure this guy didn't get knocked out.
But now is the helicopter slowly starting to sink. We were following instructions. And back then the instructions were okay, gentlemen. If the helicopter lands in the water, everybody stays seated. The helicopter will sink. It will roll over and you just swim out after that. And of course, we're not smart enough to realize that's a really bad idea. But, you know, it was about 30 feet deep where we were doing this. So he thought, I don't big deal. If it sinks down, will, will swim out. Well, so finally, as the, as a helo has kind of slowly starting to sink, the crew chief realizes, got to get the world out.
Well, we're looking out the side door. And of course, that blade is like almost cliff in the water. And it's like, oh, how about this? But he's given us the go sign. So we all dive out. Well, the pilot's got no control of helicopter. So now is we're all out trying to swim towards a safety boat who is a ways going, I don't think I'm coming. The helo starts to kind of follow us. And finally, you know, we all get out of, get out of harm's way.
And the helo, I mean, the pilot, good pilot, I mean, after about an hour and a half, he manages literally to drive the helo off to point golf, you know, that point over there. And teach the helo.
So he saves the helicopter and nobody got injured, but the funny part about it was as I got told later. So the parents are all in the bleachers.
And Lieutenant Martin is telling the story about, oh, you know, helicopter cash. He says, and then all of a sudden all the parents got up there ran past me.
I'm like, what's going on? And of course, the helicopter landed in the water. And I remember faculty as we got back to the got back to the beach.
He said something to the effect of boy, I hope this isn't indication of how the rest of your career is going to go. And of course, it was an invitation of how the rest of the career would go.
That's that's good times. Yeah.
So now you go to UDT 11 and check in the UDT 11 and look like I said, I didn't want to read, I don't want to read a ton of stuff from the books today because you did this stuff on audio book.
But you captured the check in process at a seal team and this was a UDT team, which later became seal teams, but I just, I just had to go. This is this is going to the book, the hero code, your latest book.
And this is what it like checking into a team. So you're the new guy, one of my officers from art. Yes, sir, I responded. It's my first day in the teams.
First day in the teams. Well, you're going to love it here. He said, the guys who will welcome you with open arms. The old Vietnam vets are really nice. They love officers, particularly new officers. They'll treat you really well. Great. I'm looking forward to it. So there we go. Out of the gate, it's a, you can see where this is going.
The slide grin came across the officers face dressed in khaki, swim trunks, boon gold t-shirts, jungle boots. We headed out of the building and on the grinder.
After a short daily briefing from the executive officer, we broke ranks and formed up into a circle, the PT circle.
And then it began. So, and soon, and you are an instant at this time, that's the lowest officer rank in the Navy. So, and today, I understand you went to Texas A&M.
No chief, the University of Texas, not Texas A&M. So you couldn't get into a real school, huh?
Before I could answer someone else offered her a response. He's from Texas. There aren't new real schools in Texas.
Also, you weren't smart enough to get into the academy. We frogman expect our officers to be smart. What did you major in?
I hesitated. Journalism. Chief.
Journalism. You're a damn reporter. Hey, exo. We don't need no damn reporter on our ranks. The executive officer smiled, but said nothing.
What seal training class were you in? A man at the far end of the circle shouted, class 95, a yelled back, you got to be kidding me.
And older officer said, speeding out a water tobacco, I heard class 95 was the easiest class ever. They had a summer hell week.
Over the next 15 minutes, all 50 men in the circle had something to say about my shortfalls.
In between repetitions of pushups, flutter kicks, set ups, and burpees, they questioned my parentage, my athleticism, my intellect, my state of origin.
The quality of my sealed training class. And of course, my love life. You got a girlfriend, one of the salty old chiefs asked, I do chief. What she looked like?
Oh, she's pretty, very petite, brown hair, hazel eyes, about five foot four. The chief smiled.
Do you think she'd like a swar the Italian with a mustache? She said, twirling the ends of his long handlebar.
I saw an opening. No chief. I said, looking around the grinder. She likes men that are taller than she is.
The circle went quiet. The chief, who stood no longer than five, no taller than five foot four, got up off the grinder and walked up to where I was standing.
Inches from my face, he sneered at me and said, are you calling me short?
The men in the circle were shaking their heads. One mouth don't go there, Anson. Another said softly, he's very sensitive about his height.
Well, chief, you are looking up at me. I told him, everyone on the grinder stopped exercising and turned my way.
What do you think that's funny, Anson? Do you think insulting a chief petty officer in the United States Navy is funny?
I am very, very sensitive about my height, and that hurts me. I paused what?
Wondering whether I'd taken my, my joke too far.
Suddenly the chief burst out laughing and the rest of the men in the circle joined in.
Welcome to the team, Anson. When the physical training ended the chief and all the other members of the team came by to shake my hand and welcome me to UDT-11.
I'd pass the test. I had a sense of humor.
Good way to check in.
You've been there before, you know, the deal.
So I was, I did this even at my program and I got went straight from, from Sealteen 1 as an E5 went to Hofstra, Kenneth, school for 13 weeks, went to Sealteen 2.
As an E5 went to Sealteen 2 as an E5.
So I hadn't been to college. It was a ridiculous program.
I feel like maybe I can get arrested for it or something because it was such a good deal.
Well, and then it did two deployments at Sealteen 2.
And then I went to college.
So I was an officer in college.
But it was, I'd been in the Sealteen's my whole adult life.
And so now I'm going to college and I'm coming home.
And, you know, I don't have anyone to banter with.
So it ends up being my wife.
And after about two or three months, finally, you know, I said something about the meal she had made or what she had prepared or something like this.
And she looked at me and she goes, hey, I'm not a team of that.
And I was, and I kind of chuckled.
But then I realized she was 100% right, you know, the, the, the lifestyle of being in a cartoon, where it's just constant attacks from everybody.
It's, it's, it's a, it's an environment that you get so used to.
You don't realize that that's just the way it is.
And, and that may actually be the best part, you know, about being in the teams.
And, and for your listeners, I mean, every morning back then, kind of pre 9, 11, we had the PT circle.
And come, hello, hi, water. You know, you were going to break out and you were going to do PT for probably an hour and a half.
And the PT circle was where boy, if, if you were not on your toes, you know, somebody was going to rip you apart.
And, and back to the point, it was this sense of humor, this, this camaraderie that was built in the PT circle in the locker room,
that then, of course, transitioned on to the, to the missions.
And you would see guys in, in, you know, very tough situations, all said in crack joke.
And that is, I think, the power of being in the team sometimes is, you, you build this,
this, this level of teamwork with your, with your, with your swim buddies that is hard to replicate anywhere.
And, and if there's one thing I miss, after retiring, many things, but that's the thing I miss the most.
It's been around team guys, being harassed, harassing people back, and realizing that, I know harm no foul.
You know, just, let's move on, that's fun.
When you checked into UDT 11, what, what did you think you were going to be doing?
So, just as a little backdrop, when I checked into CLT 11, in 1991, I thought I was going to nom.
Oh, I can, my mind, I was like, hey, look, man, I know we don't know about this stuff, there's top secret stuff going on.
I know, I'm probably going to nom or whatever, Cambodian, I'm going to do in sock missions.
That's what I was thinking, because I was really young and really dumb.
When you checked into UDT 11, what was it?
1970, 1978, early 1970, yeah.
What did you think you were going to be doing?
Same thing.
I mean, I'm on your hood.
Well, back then, of course, we thought we were going to go back and rescue POWs out of the, or this was the cold war, kind of the higher the cold war.
So, we thought we were going to be doing missions against the Soviet Union.
And I don't think I mentioned the story in any of the books, but when I first got there, I was out,
during a dive training dive one day, and one of the chiefs comes, grabs me, says, hey, sir, can any officer wants to see you?
I mean, I'm an innocent, a painting officer, I mean, he's an important guy, and I thought, all right, this is it.
I mean, it's something important.
So, I get up and he and I said, well, let me go back and change you.
I was not, CO said just come, come as you are.
I was in my shorty wetsuit, so I go up, going, wait outside the CO's office and the CO's assistant says,
yeah, I go in and see him, and I admit the CO, but yeah, I mean, I was an innocent.
He was the commanding officer.
So, I come in and, he says, sense of the gravy, yeah, good to see you again.
Yes, sir, he says, I've been hearing good things about you, and I'm thinking, yeah, okay.
He says, he says, we got something important coming up, and, yeah, I need one of my best
in, so I'm going to run this thing.
Yeah, this is the most important way to get to the point.
Yeah, this is because, and he says, you know, the fourth of July is coming up, and we need somebody
to be the frog float officer.
And of course, I'm like, I'm sorry, sir, what?
You guys, yeah, every fourth of July, we build a frog float to be in the corner
out of parade, and I want you to be the frog float officer, and I was like, you have got to be kidding.
But I remember when I came out, I kind of had this kind of hound dog look on my face, and there was
a, I don't remember hercial Davis.
Yeah, so hercial Davis was the commanding master, you've over at Sealtime, or under what
of dimlas in team 12, and he sees you walking down, and I'm a little hand, you know,
shoulders and how to go, what's wrong, that's a, that's a,
master of he said, I said, I thought I was going to do some important.
I'm going to be the frog float officer.
And hercial said something said, well, then be the best damn frog float officer you can be.
And I thought, well, that's it right there.
Whatever it is, whether you're the frog float officer or plant and eel grass, which was another one we had to do.
Do it the best you can.
I'm a eel grass.
Plant and eel grass.
So the reason the Coronado San Diego Bay looks as good as it does, and as clean as it is, is because back in
1978, UDT 12, UDT 11 and Sealtime 1, we all got out and planted eel grass under water.
So the eel grass would grow to bring in the little fish used to clean out San Diego Bay.
And it worked, but that was hours of diving at three feet under the water planting eel grass.
Yeah, I never did those missions to get the Soviet Union or to go back and a Vietnam.
I was on my first deployment, so I get there, we deployed the Guam, and we shell up there, and they immediately have us do like a double duck insert.
We go in, we hit a target, live fire, we come over to the beach, hit a target, live fire, we get done.
We're all, you know, pretty, it's pretty cool.
And then we go out the next day, we clean our weapons, we go out, they say, hey, you know, get your weapons cited in.
Okay, you know, and of course same thing in my mind, I'm thinking we're getting ready for the big mesh.
So we go out, we sight in our weapons, clean them, sight them in, get back.
And then a couple days goes by and they give us pages too, right?
It's back in the day, you know, you might as well just be, you know, it was just as crazy as it gets.
So I got the page. Well, a couple days go by three days, four days go by and we're not getting the big recall.
You know, I don't know if they're trying to negotiate with whoever the terrorist were that we're needed to die or whatever the case was.
But also there was good waves. So I said, you know what?
I told my, told my roommate, like a couple of us are going to go surfing, so we went down the Spanish steps and we were surfing.
And all of a sudden I'm looking up on the cliffs and there's the guy that we told is up there waving his arms,
frantically. And holy shit, right? We're getting recalled. This is it.
So run in, run up the Spanish steps, grab, you know, hey, what's going on?
So we got recalled. She'll as me as pageers got the 911 page.
Damn, it's on. We get back, we get down to the Petune space.
And, you know, the free con senior chief comes in and he says,
Hey, you guys, you, you didn't clean up your brass, other.
I'm the right, you said it in your weapons. You guys got to go clean up your breasts.
So that was when I realized it maybe wasn't going to quite, I wasn't going to know him after all.
How long were you, how long did you, UDT 11 then?
Two years.
And did you, did you do a platoon there? Were you like an assistant platoon?
I was an assistant platoon commander, Dave Tash, Lieutenant Dave Tash was a platoon commander.
I was in the SDV platoon.
So, you know, when I first got there, of course, thinking I was going to do real frogman stuff
and being a regular underwater demolition team platoon, which was, as you know,
this was about kind of clearing beaches and that sort of thing.
And then I find out there are these things called back then Swimmer Delivery Vehicles
now sealed delivery vehicles. And the first I was, I wasn't happy about being a sign to an SDV platoon.
Turned out to be one of the best platoon I was ever in.
It was just, it was real frogman stuff because we were doing, you know, six hour dives
and are so for the, again, the listener in SDV is, you know,
think about a man torpedo with a bit of a cowling on it.
So you had a, we started off with what was called the Mark 7.
So you had a pilot in the front and a navigator in the back.
And you could squeeze two more guys in if you had to.
And you could put some demolition in there.
And then they would launch off the bigger submarines.
And then later we got the Mark 8, which was a bigger, sealed delivery vehicle.
But it was all about diving.
And you spent, you know, four days a week underwater.
And an important thing to note about this, when you say many submarine,
there's a key component that is not what you're thinking if you're listening to this.
And that is it's a rather wet submersible.
So you're not in this thing dry.
You're diving while you're in a, you're basically on a motorcycle.
Underwater underwater.
Underwater.
Yeah. So, so I was one of the primary pilots.
And I, and I loved driving the SDV. And of course, you know,
some back here in Coronado, California.
And I had a chance to go back.
You relive those days where you were going under the bridge.
And back then you had what was called an obstacle avoidance sonar.
And the OAS as we referred to it.
Yeah.
The underwater obstacles were not real clear.
You really had to have a good eye to be able to read the obstacle avoidance sonar.
So the navigator would read the OAS.
And it was this kind of green glow.
And you'd have to pick out the pylons and the,
and the ships coming at you underwater in this green glow.
They've gotten much better today.
But back then the technology just wasn't very good.
So we tended to run into things every once in a while.
You know, ships, the Coronado Bay Bridge.
You know, and then you just, this fiberglass that you bring it back in.
And the Master Chief who was our fiberglass guru would give me that look like
I can't believe you ran into something again.
He fixed up the fiberglass.
You get back in the water.
Did you go on a deployment?
I did.
Yeah.
Did a first West back.
So I went over to Subic Bay.
That's where Naval Special Warfare Unit 1 was in Subic Bay at the time.
And the USS Greyback, which was our Special Operations submarine.
So the Greyback had these two big chambers on it.
It used to launch Regulus missiles.
And they had converted these chambers to be able to launch the,
seal the liver vehicles.
So we went out there and again, spent a lot of time under way on board the USS Greyback,
conducting training operations.
Once again, thinking we were going to go, you know, run against flat of OAS stock or something like that.
So there was always, and you remember the time.
When, when you were training, one of the things that always motivated you was, this could become a real world mission sometime.
You know, if you ever got to the point where you were training and you didn't think that you were going to be able to take that training and apply it in more time,
then I think it demotivated.
But the fact matter is, every time we went out on training up, there was always this idea that we're going against the Soviets.
Or, you know, we're going to go back and Vietnam and get the POWs that might still be there.
Or, we're going to go do some, you know, some of the nation's bidding somewhere.
And that always pushed you to do absolutely, you're very best on every single training mission.
No matter how hard it was, even though it was a training up, you wanted to push it to the limits because you wanted to be ready for the real world up.
Yeah, and there was also this, I don't know if it's a specter, but this belief that this real world mission,
whatever it was going to be, since it was a little bit unknown, you didn't, you didn't know it.
You didn't know what it was going to be.
So it was always like I need to prepare even more.
Even more, because we just don't even know how crazy it's going to be.
Right.
Then how long, so you did one deployment to this, to Suic Bay, and then you got done with that.
And then you got, did you get stationed at Suic Bay, right?
So yeah, so I had my first set of orders to the Naval Post graduate school.
And I ended up having five sets of orders of which I didn't execute the first four of them because I got pulled out to go through something else.
But yeah, as soon as I got back, I just had made an impression, a good impression on the commanding officer out there in Suic.
So I got back thinking I was going to go to a wonderful tour in Monterey, California, and as soon as I got back, the commanding officer says, hey, good news.
The commanding officer of Naval Special Warfare Unit 1 has asked for you by name, and you get to go to the Philippines for two years.
And I thought, this is going to be tough.
And once again, it turned out to be an absolutely fabulous tour.
My wife and I went out there, my first child was all of a couple of months old at that time.
And we worked hard in the Philippines, supporting the platoons that would deploy over.
So back then, Unit 1 and the Philippines, the platoons from San Diego, would deploy out there that was kind of our home base,
and then they would go from there to other places.
But Unit 1 had the responsibility to support it.
So I got there, I started off as the intelligence officer, and then, since it kind of became the utility infield or the training officer and a lot of other things.
But it was a great group of guys out there, good mission, and life in the Philippines back then was a good time.
You relay one of these training operations in the book Sea Stories that I would say left at Mark on you.
You were basically running a training mission.
You had a Marine Colonel that was playing the role of a hostage.
So he was being held out in a jungle camp somewhere, and he's out there for a few days.
And then the seal team, the seal platoon, gets the tasking to go out and rescue this guy.
And it, well, it doesn't go well.
They get compromised, and it sort of falls on its face.
But the Marine Colonel, Colonel Brouse, how do you say his name?
Colonel Brouse. He was like, hey, listen, we already did this much.
Let's continue to execute the rest of the plan, even though it wasn't great.
Let's just continue doing it.
So they, to finish the exercise, they had to move the Colonel to an extraction point,
where he was going to get picked up by, by sea one, 30s, and then the sea one, 30s,
we're going to take them on a low level flight.
And, you know, you're, what do you, Lieutenant J.J. at this point?
I'm a judge of you, right?
You've had this, this Colonel out in the field for three, four days, and you say, hey, sir, you know,
you don't, we can get you back to base.
And he's like, no, let's just get it done.
Let's, let's do the whole thing.
And a little more time goes by and you say, hey, sir, you know, you don't really need to get this plan.
It's not going to be any training value for you.
And he says, no, you know, we'll just do it.
And he said, well, that's what a good leader does.
So like, and they don't just, you know, bust out when things are going to get boring.
But then there's another delay.
The sea one, 30s that are supposed to pick them up are, they're late, they're delayed.
And finally delayed multiple times. And finally, you say, you know, hey, sir, like, we don't know when this is going to happen.
Why don't you just, you know, you and I will go look it out of here.
You can go in the end. And of course, he's a Colonel.
He's got stuff to do. He's got work to do.
So he knows that too.
So finally, he says, look, you know what, you're right.
I got to get back to work.
And so he doesn't get on the sea one, 30.
You don't get on the sea one, 30.
So he's got a bunch of Americans, Australians, New Zealand, some Filipinos on there.
And I'm just going to go to the book here.
Browse, that's the Colonel.
Browse and I returned to a waiting Jeep.
I shook his hand.
Thank you for helping out with the exercise and watched a young pediosterat escort him back to Subic.
Exhausted.
I jumped in another Jeep and drove home.
It had been a long couple of days.
Half an hour later, aboard the MC 130, call sign stray 59.
The pilot checked his instruments.
Like the rest of us, the preceding days for him and his crew had been long and tiring.
Adjusting his night vision goggles, he could see the water just a few feet below him.
The water was closer than expected.
Too close to recover.
The tip of the left wing caught the top of a small wave.
And in an instant, the plane tumbled forward, exploding in a few injected ball of flame
as it violently ripped apart from the impact of the aircraft and the sea.
Of the 24 men aboard, eight crew members and 16 passengers from the United States, Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines,
all but one Air Force first lieutenant Jeffrey A.
Blom died in the crash.
Life in the sealed teams always seems to revolve around fate or destiny or the hand of God.
Why do some men live and others die?
Why were some men saved that day?
Did God have a different plan for us?
What about the crew and passengers of stray 59?
Surely their families would have wanted them longer in their lives?
They were all brave and honorable men, all worthy of a full and prosperous life.
I think about them often.
20 years later, as I rose to the rank of Admiral and Coment,
and combat in Iraq and Afghanistan became a daily activity, I thought a lot about stray 59.
The role of the MC-130s and their sister aircraft, the AC-130s, became more and more important to our special operations missions.
With every plan I reviewed and every plan I approved, I asked myself silently whether the risk to the crew and the aircraft was worth the reward.
I can only hope that the sacrifice of the men aboard stray 59 saved lives, lives of men and women who have no idea that their destiny rested
with a plane that took off from QB airfield in 1981 and never returned.
May God rest at their souls.
That means real world missions and regular missions in the military.
There's always some level of risk.
Yeah, and as you well know, there are times when you go left and right and it makes a difference between life and death.
You make one decision and it changes the lives of dozens of men and women.
And this is the nature of life in the teams.
I think back over those 37 years and I've written about a few of them in the book, but there were more of them.
And you've been there where all of a sudden you have this near-death experience.
The parachute doesn't get blown up by one of your hundred things, but it doesn't happen.
You manage to get through it.
Or it happens and it's over and you've survived and you don't spend a lot of time thinking about it.
You're like, okay, well the reserve opened, that's good.
Or the guy fired an inch from me and said, hey, that's good.
And that's that becomes almost a daily, weekly, monthly occurrence.
And you just learn to compartmentalize you learn to live with it.
But there was something about Strafe 59.
It was obviously the magnitude of the crash.
And just the fact that as you read it so beautifully there, you know, I had asked the Colonel three times.
Because again, he was an important guy. He was in charge of the officer of the provost.
And he was a senior Marine there at Sybiki, a great guy.
And I had kind of encouraged him to be this hostage.
And so in the course of the day, which was relationship building.
Which was a relationship building.
What was the deal?
How could we were and then things didn't go well.
But we were actually on the ramp of the C130.
As we were getting ready the third time.
And I knew, you know, you've been on these flights, you know, the C130, you know, the low-level terrain following is,
I mean, it's a vomit rocket.
It's something down. And some guys don't handle it very well.
And I thought, you know, we're going to do that for three and a half hours.
Does it really need to do that?
And it wasn't until we were actually staying on the ramp.
And he says, yeah, okay, let's go.
And then of course, I got the call about an hour or so later.
We had to remuster in the compound there at Naval Special War for you.
And I didn't know why.
And of course, they were trying to get a headcount to find out who was still alive.
And you have a lot of those in the course of your career.
And you hope you learn from them. And as I pointed out in the book,
then when I was in a position of command, you know, from the time I was the commander of
Seal Team 3 or the Commodore or certainly my time after 9-11,
you're reviewing these missions.
And particularly with the MC-130s and the AC-130s, because, you know, in combat the guy, they want to push the envelope.
It's okay to push the envelope.
But only if the reward is worth the risk.
Because, you know, I wanted to make, and it wasn't just the C130s.
I mean, I, the helicopter pilots, I remember one point in time after not my unit,
but another unit had lost a heel-o and a couple seals had been on board.
But the mission they were running, I thought, was a little too high risk.
I pulled all the war in officers in that were flying for me.
And I said, when I'm going to do that, here's the deal.
If I find out that you take off on a mission that is red, I'm going to fire your ass and
send you back to the States.
You ought to start off every mission in the green.
In other words, you ought to have planned it to reduce the risk as much as possible.
If it's a really important mission, maybe I'll let you start off in the amber,
but we're going to have that conversation.
But we are not going to start off the mission in the red.
It ain't worth it.
If you think the shadow governor of pickup province is worth it,
he's not.
We'll come back and get him tomorrow.
And I didn't know how that would be received by the pilots, because, you know,
I mean, I was, you know, when you start losing guys and losing helicopters,
you know, you really want to make sure you're doing things the right way,
because you don't want to lose any more men if you don't have to.
And afterwards, I had a couple of the old salty, you know,
warrants come up to me and they were appreciative of the fact that,
hey, here's the line.
We are not going to do this.
Now again, missions may go in the red.
I got it.
But let's not start off in the red.
Let's not build, you know, risk into the mission.
And I think a lot of that goes back to Stray 59,
to realizing that the, you know, lives are on the line,
particularly in these, these aircraft and the helos and everything else
we fly around it.
But the interesting thing, so when I, when I wrote this,
I had no idea where Colonel Brous was.
Didn't, I assumed he had passed away long since and,
and frankly, the last time I saw him was probably a few years after,
uh, it's probably in the mid 80s.
Well, I get an email from his son,
who had read the book, and he says, hey, sir,
my father still live and, and I'd like to send him a copy of this book.
So, uh, I reach out to talk to Colonel Brous.
He and his wife are, I mean, he's in his 90s.
Sharp as he can be.
And, uh, and he remembered the story.
And again, you're always pleased.
You remember the story exactly as I, as I presented in the book.
And, uh, but, uh, but he also remembered the fact that, uh,
his life changed that day.
And, and that had a, had a, had a big impact on him as well.
And he was a combat veteran from,
from Vietnam.
Vietnam Vietnam. Oh, yeah. Yeah, heavily decorated.
Um, yeah, I mean, he was a, a hard charge in this was,
and this was not an admin marine.
This was a, a hell of a combat vet. Yeah.
Well, note, if you're out there listening, um, Colonel Brous, open invite.
If you want to come on here and talk about your experiences,
um, I'm, I'm going to fast forward a little bit.
Uh, going, I'm going to go to the book,
make your bed again,
going to July 1983.
Here we go.
July 1983 was at one of those tough moments.
As I stood before the commanding officer,
I thought my career as a Navy seal was over.
I just been relieved of my seal squadron,
fired for trying to change the way my squadron was organized,
trained and conducted missions.
There were some magnificent officers and enlisted men in the organization,
some of the most professional warriors I had ever been around.
However, much of the culture was still rooted in the Vietnam era,
and I thought that it was time for a change.
As I was to find out, change is never easy,
particularly for the person in charge.
Fortunately, even though I was fired,
my commanding officer allowed me to transfer to another seal team,
but my reputation as a seal officer was severely damaged.
Everywhere I went, other officers and enlisted men knew I had failed,
and every day there were whispers and subtle reminders
that maybe I wasn't up to the task of being a seal.
At that point in my career, I had two options,
quit and move on to civilian life,
which seemed like the logical choice in the light of my recent officer fitness report,
or whether the storm and prove to others and myself,
that I was a good seal officer.
I chose the latter.
So, here you are, want to be a good seal,
and you tried to implement some changes.
You, I guess, swam against the stream.
When you look back at that, this is a subject
that I've talked about a lot,
because there's a book called About Face by Colonel David Hackworth,
and at the end of the Vietnam War,
he went on a TV program called Issues and Answers,
and then said, we're going to lose this war if we don't change the way we're fighting it,
and he was drawn down to the army in another couple of months,
and my debate is always, you know,
he was a golden child in the army at that point,
and would have absolutely been up for brigade command and division command,
and he would have been in charge of tens of thousands,
if not more, and could have really influenced the way the war was fought.
But he spoke up, and, you know, that was it.
He made some enemies, and because people, you know,
and I work with a lot of businesses, and people this happens in business,
where people, they want to speak up, they see something that maybe could be done better, different.
And of course, there's always a particular line that I make.
Look, if someone's doing something that's illegal, immoral, or unethical,
okay, we're not doing that, we got it.
But a lot of times, and I wrote about this in leadership strategy and tactics,
I called it conformed to influence, because when I was in my first seal,
I was, I wanted to be a hardcore, and so it was mean.
I was wearing a rock sack on the O-Course, and wearing a rock sack out on the runs,
and I was a new guy, and I thought I was being cool, and, and hard,
and getting ready for war.
But my platoon was kind of looking at me like, you know,
who do you think you are, you're truly trying to prove, hey, Rambo,
and I realized, oh, I need to be a part of this team,
if I'm going to have influence over them.
Do I want them to train harder? Yeah, I do, absolutely.
But if they don't like me, if I'm not part of the team,
they're not going to listen to anything I say, as a matter of fact,
I'm ostracizing myself.
So I know this is a, it seems like you went through this situation
where, you know, you held up your hand and made a call,
I'm going to go in this direction, and I think we should go in this direction,
and didn't work out.
The other part of this is I always say,
if you're doing the right things for the right reasons,
you'll win in the end.
But it sometimes can take a long time before you, you quote,
win, and you might take some tactical losses along the way,
but if you're doing the right things for the right reasons,
eventually things should go your way.
When you reflect on on whatever went down at that command,
and the way it turned out, what did you learn from it?
Yeah, I learned a lot from it, actually.
And it all, I think, positively influenced me over the years.
First, I didn't make all the right calls.
I mean, there's no question about it.
I could have been a better officer, and, you know,
at the end of the day, the commanding officer has the right to decide
who he thinks is going to be leading his potions, his squadrons,
and I've never really faulted the CO for making that decision.
I realized I could have done things better.
The command could have done things better,
but to your point, I, part of what I learned was,
I didn't conform, I think, the way that they had hoped I would conform.
And part of it was, it just wasn't me.
It wasn't a good cultural fit for me at the time.
But, but I think you nailed it when you said,
you know, there are times if you're going to influence the people that work with you,
better do it from inside the wire than outside the wire sort of thing.
Now, again, back to the, it's got to be more illegal in ethical.
But, but what I also learned was, you know, you're going to have these rough times in the team,
so anywhere you go.
But, but that day I went home and I remember thinking,
and I said, I don't know if I got a career left here.
And, I had a long life, and I've been married at that point in time.
You know, five, six years, something like that.
And I came home and I said, yeah, I'm not sure what I should do.
And she said, look, you've never quit it anything in your life.
Don't start now. And, you know, best advice I could have had.
And, of course, you got to weather the storm, because fortunately, the commanding officer,
I mean, my paper wasn't good, but it wasn't bad.
I mean, he didn't crush me and my fitness report.
I was picked up by another team right after that,
who the commanding officer kind of gave me a second chance.
I made the best of that second chance.
But, you know, I go to a new team and, of course, the guys know.
The rep, the rep you say, something, if you don't know, and the seal teams and life,
but in the seal teams, it's like multiplied it in tents, if I do.
The reputation is so powerful.
And, I mean, there's guys that make a mistake when they show up as a new guy.
And 25 years later, they retire, and their nickname is still based on the fact that they did something stupid.
It's a new guy.
Everybody knows that.
That's when you meet them, that's their name.
Is whatever done thing they did when they were a new guy, when they were 18 or 19 years old.
Well, and this was, you know, so there was kind of the Skrissper campaign,
well, I got to the new team and you understand that and you realize, hey, I got a prudent wrong.
I've got to prove that I'm a good officer and so fortunately soon after I got to the command,
I went on a deployment.
It was a good deployment.
I did well at the command.
I went on to another command and then, you know, you begin to rebuild your reputation
and frankly never looked back after that.
But what it also helped me do was when I got into command.
And all of my command tours thereafter.
When I saw somebody that made a mistake, when I saw somebody that screwed up,
you want to find an opportunity if they're a good officer, a good-enlisted,
to give them that second chance.
So that they aren't branded with, you know, a bad reputation.
You put them in a position to be successful to get over whatever that fall
through that failure might have been.
And I was fortunate to have an officer named John Sandos who picked me up at Seal Team 4.
You know, took me under his wing and said, hey, I remember you from my time at the West Coast
and let's get back to work.
And again, that kind of quickly got me over the hump and then, you never looked back.
So, you know, when you have the opportunity and leadership position to help somebody out
to give them that second chance to put them on the path to be better than what they were.
You take that opportunity.
How freaking crazy-obsessive were you to do a good job when you got the team 4?
I mean, I can't even imagine if I was in that situation,
I was already crazy on trying to do a good job, you know?
I keep you must have been just a full bore, like your wife must have said,
after another three months, she must have said, maybe you should quit.
There was a lot of that, but you also realized you can't overreact.
And I think when I got in there at first, I would see things people, you know,
that I thought were sliding me and initially I kind of react to it because I was overly sensitive
to it when it was just team guys being team guys.
You know, back to the PT circle, you know, you think,
was there something hidden in that?
And there wasn't.
And so, you got to kind of get over that and find that balance that goes, okay,
like, yeah, you're going to get harassed.
That's part of being in the teams, enjoy the good nature of harassment,
and don't take it so personal every time.
But to your point, probably took me a while to get over that.
I think I had to get past the deployment.
And then my next job is as the ops officer,
I sealed the liver vehicle team too, and I had a great bunch of guys there.
And again, everything went well, never looked back.
What did you do for a deployment at team four?
So I went down to South America, to the unit of the officers.
And had a great opportunity and the thing about it was, I mean,
we just, you know, you kind of lived off the land back then.
We weren't as sophisticated, we didn't kind of have the money.
So we parachuted into Columbia.
Yeah, spent three weeks in some, you know, back part of Columbia,
where most of the day we were forging for food.
So, you know, we were looking for drinkable water.
I had to send, you know, a couple of guys to go to the market to get food,
because we didn't back then, yes, you could have brought sea rats as we refer to them.
The MREs of today.
But those were heavy.
Those were big boxes.
We didn't want to be carrying that around.
So, you know, a couple of guys would be assigned child duty,
while the rest of the team went out and worked with the Buzotactico.
So, the Colombians.
And then we went from there to Ecuador to Peru to Chile to Brazil.
I mean, it was a great planet.
So, I think you did, um,
ops officer at SDV team too.
Right.
And then from you there, 1989, you're the, you're the exo, it's the old team one.
Yeah, so from from SDV team,
you know, when I've been gone for two and a half years.
Okay.
And, you know, every operator goes kicking the screen into an admin job.
Um, but this one actually probably set me up for success much more so than I would have thought,
because you get into the Pentagon.
And this was at a time when again, the seals we worked for the surface warfare guys.
Um, the ship drivers.
And we worked in what was called Oppo 3 in the Pentagon.
But it was there where all the money that the seals got for beans, bullets, bodies, buildings,
you name it, came through the Pentagon.
So, I learned, I was a Lieutenant made Lieutenant Commander there.
And I learned how to work the system.
How to get manpower in a seal team.
How to get buildings built.
How to get money for more ammunition.
None of my contemporaries had that experience.
So when I left, um, the Pentagon,
and then went off to be the executive officer at seal team one, uh, in 1988.
Um, I mean, as the exo, uh, nobody could keep up because the seal was saying,
hey, can we get some more body sir?
Yes sir, I know how to do that.
You know, and, uh, and so understanding the resourcing end of it, uh, you know,
major good staff officer.
No seal wants to have that monochron.
You know, you're a good staff officer.
But at the end of the day, the good staff officers are what allow the team guys,
the operators to have the equipment they need and, uh,
you know, the money to go through the training and that sort of thing.
Now by that time as the, as the 80s and the Reagan years and the Reagan build-up
starts, the money started to come.
But before that, uh, we in the seal team, we're living on a shoe string after Vietnam.
Uh, I mean, you know, you, uh, you would go out to Nyland, California,
uh, which was our, our desert, our desert training area.
It's our only training area.
And, uh, and I think they, they paid you like $8 a day.
Uh, and, and you were like, woo, $8 a day.
That's great.
Uh, because a lot of other places you went, you went on permissive T.D.Y.
Meaning they didn't, didn't pay anything.
You just went.
Um, we always had a lot of ammunition and demolition.
But not much else.
What was the billet that you ran out of the Pentagon?
So I was the assistant to the director of, uh, what they called, up 37.
So 337 was the designator for the Naval Special Warfare, actually,
I'm not sure we called it Naval Special Warfare, right then.
That didn't come along until a little bit later.
But, yeah, that was a seal component in the Pentagon that did all the resourcing.
I know when I came in the military, I thought, like, the whole idea that you had to pay for
stuff just didn't even make sense to me.
I thought everything was just free, right?
Hey, you need gas.
You go to the gas thing at the Navy base and they'll give you the gas you need.
Didn't even make sense to me that you had to pay for ammo and that human beings.
Like, oh, you're going to assign people to a seal team.
Well, but I was just, they're just people that show up there.
So that, that the idea that was real foreign to me when people started talking
about how much this trip is going to cost.
I would be like, what were in the military?
What are you talking about?
Um, so that gave you, yeah, for sure.
That's some insight you asked ahead.
You were like a black belt compared to the rest of these guys running around.
Yeah, and nobody wanted to go to the Pentagon, of course.
And, and Nor had I wanted to go initially.
Um, but again, it turned out to be a great two and a half years because you learned
the system well.
And frankly, that served me throughout, as I became a community officer in the
Commodore, I understood how to walk the halls of the Pentagon and how to leverage
those resources we needed to get the job done.
Yeah, you mentioned so far a bunch of different relationships that you have.
Had and built and I mean, they, they shine throughout everything that you're right about.
It's all about who you're working with and oh, I've worked with this guy in the past and
knew this individual and we spent time together the relationships that you build.
But not only in the SEAL teams, but then you start talking about relationships that you have
and in the Pentagon and who you work with there and who you know, it's.
You can't, there's no possible way to to overestimate the amount of,
or why you get on having good relationships with people and treat them.
It's good.
All of the people.
It's all about relationships and particularly after 9.11, you realize even more so because
your relationships with the CIA, with the National Security Agency, with the National
Geospatial Agency, with the Army Navy Air Force Marine Corps, with the service
chiefs when I became the so-com commander.
I mean, you have to build these relationships with the combatant commanders, with up and
down the chain of command because it's the relationships that are going to
allow you to get the mission done.
And if you have built good relationships, if you haven't burned the bridges because you
got hacked off about something, those relationships really pay dividends in combat.
I had my, when I was a task unit commander, my two-partume commanders come into me and
we're out at Nylon and we've got a bunch of paperwork due to the commanding officer.
You know, the serialized inventory and the qualifications, the various guys and all this.
And they, they look like, we should have to do all this paperwork right now.
This is bullshit.
Come on.
We're, we're training for war.
And, you know, they tried to, they tried to capitalize on my war like me.
They tried to, you know, we're training for war.
And I said, hey, guys, we're going to do all this paperwork.
We're going to turn in perfectly and we're going to do it before anyone else does.
Because we got to have a good relationship with the boss.
And if the boss doesn't think I can get paperwork turned in on time, why is he going
to trust me to go out and run operations?
Exactly right.
From there, you know, you go to, to exo-seal team one.
Who's that? Who is the seal when you were there?
Commander Tim Holden. Okay.
Yeah.
Phenom Laws, or Naval Academy graduate MIT, a lot like Danle Stewart.
I mean, hard as nails.
Tim would the PT everybody into the ground, just a remarkable officer.
Unfortunately, he was killed in the bicycle accident several years ago.
But just a terrific terrific guy.
And you did one, you did one operation there, which was the recovery of a Navy aircraft.
That had crashed in 1948.
Yeah, it was a P2V.
So think of the P3 variant back then.
And yeah, Commander Holden, Tim Holden had been sent out as you recall.
This was during the kind of the tanker wars and been sent out to the windbrown.
So I was the acting CEO as the executive officer.
And George Bush, who had been, I think initially the vice president,
then of course became president, had had been petitioned by the families of the,
the naval aviators that have been killed in this crash.
The plane had never been found.
And they had been asking for the Navy to put on kind of a full court press,
try to find the aircraft there had been some speculation where it went down.
And this had gone on for years.
Eventually, somebody found the remains, but because it was in such kind of treacherous condition,
they couldn't, or found the, what they thought was the remains of the airplane,
but couldn't get to it.
So obviously, we get the letter, you know, the president wants us to go recover
to the aircraft because it's at about 10,000 feet.
That's why they thought it was.
And they figured we could do some high-altitude diving.
So as the executive officer, I get tagged to be the kind of mission commander.
And it was a unique experience.
I took kind of George Park Hill, who was, I think George was probably a chief or
senior chief at the time.
And then the dive locked him on.
And he was the dive master.
And that's why I picked George.
And a couple of other great guys to go up there.
And so we get up to this place called Firstofino.
And then we have to take a yellow out to the middle of nowhere on the outback.
And the place where we think the plane is crashed is in what I believe
to have been coming all of volcanic, you know, area.
I mean, it looks like the inside of what you think of as a volcano, almost like
Diamondhead.
And there's a lake in the middle of it.
Where the snow has melted off and you could only get into this place like for a month
out of the year because it would freeze over.
And so this was, I think, September timeframe.
So we get on the ground and there's, I mean, the helo can't even land.
So we had to kind of jump off the helo and kind of get set up.
But we're looking around and there's clearly no airplane in this, in this bowl
we're in.
But there is, off to the area where the sun doesn't hit.
So the sun would kind of make its way around, but never kind of got to this area.
And as you look, there's this kind of, the only thing I think of to describe is like a snow tunnel.
And it goes up about a thousand plus feet and it is, you know, I mean, it's just a,
an area that's just completely covered with ice.
And we're looking around thinking that the plane is probably in the water.
That's where why we were sent up to get it.
Well, the next day after we get in there, Park Hill goes over and starts
chipping into this, this kind of ice cave and goes in and I'll be down there.
The plane is, it is hidden under the size cave and has been there for, you know,
40, 50 years that point in time.
Of course it is because the ice would melt and it would just crush the plane.
So there's nothing left, but you know, tiny pieces, although actually the 50 cows survived.
But so now we have found the remains of the plane.
And again, there was some, we eventually bring some of the family out.
It was fitting enough to be there.
We did manage find some bone fragments and we buried those at the site.
But in the, in the book, I, I tell the story and I said, you can believe it or not,
but it is true and I'm not the only one to have seen it.
As we are kind of burying the, the remains of this thing.
And we, I say a little prayer over this, this cross we put up there.
And as I get through saying it, I'll send one of the guys turns me goes,
hey sir, take a look up there.
And again, if you can imagine we're in this bowl and I think it goes up to about 8,000 feet or something like that.
And right above the ridge line, I see what looks like a parachute flare.
I'm thinking, if somebody shoot in parachute flares, you know, I'm looking around thinking,
well, maybe one of our guys is, you know, shooting parachute flares,
I know what a shooting parachute flares, there's one, and there's two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,
and the kind of hovering up there.
And look around taking a foot in the world.
And the guy says, hey sir, how many of those do you see?
And again, it's just this kind of glowing orb and it's just kind of floating up there and,
we're nine of them.
And there were nine victims on the plane.
And it was up there for 10 or 15 minutes.
I'll kind of hover it up and then one by one, they just kind of went up.
So I said, look, you can believe the story or not, but not the only one that's on it.
And I've often thought, well, if somebody was firing parachute flares, please let me know
because it was kind of one of those surreal moments because you are out in the outback
where there is nothing out there.
But interestingly enough, another kind of story like the Barney Browse story
and that I did a call from a good friend who you had no Jeremy Williams.
And Jay W says, hey, sir, got an army buddy.
We were just having dinner and I was telling him about your book.
And he's going to call you when he gets to San Francisco.
I said, okay, so he's flying back to Hawaii and I got a call from this guy.
He says, hey, sir, Jay W was telling me about your story and your book.
And so I got a copy of it.
That was my grandfather that died on that crash.
And by the way, my grandmother is still alive.
So I got a hold of the grandmother and it was just a great conversation.
Wonderful lady.
And I told her, I said, man, I don't know what to say.
The story I'm telling you in the book is exactly true.
You know, my hope is, you know, that your husband is in the right place.
And this and her husband had been a young pediolce in the Navy during World War Two.
It gets out of the Navy after World War Two.
And then, Mr. Navy so much comes back in.
Get to sign up to with the island as a back ender on this P2V and, unfortunately,
crashes in the P2V.
And there's 23 years old or something like that.
But it was just the connections.
I've been interested in him.
The book gets out there and then somebody reads it and then makes a connection.
You know, six degrees for a move sort of thing.
Yeah, that whole story is sounds.
It's almost supernatural.
It's the story.
There are other things that you talk about in the book worth reading.
So you get done with that and you do, is that when you rolled into being a task unit commander?
Right.
So then this was right before it does its storm.
So when I left the XO back then, the executive officers,
a lot of times would go do and be the task unit commander for a deployed,
you know, a shield button on an amphibious ready group.
So it was, again, this was 1990, summer of 1990,
and I'm with Comphibron 5.
And so I go off as an O4 as the task unit commander.
And no sooner, you know, we left in June, I guess.
And then, sedan invades Iraq in August, I think.
So we were already on deployment and we were a full up amphibious ready group.
So we became kind of the go-to guys as the rest of the Navy was kind of building the rest of the amphibious
ready groups.
But we'd already been through the whole work up.
So we kind of immediately got tasked to head out to the Gulf.
I had a chance to introduce some maritime introduction operations, which were a lot of fun,
considering those were kind of the first of their kind.
That was the big mesh back there.
That's right.
The meal, the maritime introduction operations.
Those were, I did those in, what was it,
1990, nine, well I guess I did some in the mid-90s.
But yeah, those were real world.
They got to lock and load my weapon.
Well, what else did you guys do for on that?
Did you guys do some hit some islands or something?
Yes, so we went out there first time in, I want to say November, December, and then,
we didn't know whether or not we were actually going to come into Kuwait.
So they sent us back to the Subic Bay for about three weeks.
Not knowing, well, are we going to, you know,
we're going to send a large force into Kuwait to kick Saddam out.
And so that was all still up in the air.
So they said, look, you guys are the most experienced, go back and wait.
So I think we spent Christmas in Subic.
And then we got the word, no, we think the things are going to go.
So they sailed us back out.
We went through the straights in the lock and the straights of Hormuz about half dozen times.
So we get out there into the Gulf and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and,
yeah, so first back in the November timeframe, we did the maritime introduction operations on some variety tankers.
And then our job was going to be to prep for the amphibious landing.
And so in addition to the fibron five, they brought what then later became the largest amphibious force.
I think since Korea, 33 ships, looking to do it in amphibious landing.
And I think the place called Ashawaba in Kuwait with the idea that we were landing the force.
And then, you know, begin to engage with the ground force and then push Saddam out of Kuwait.
Well, it, it, of course, became one of the faints.
The idea was, we, we want to hold down Saddam's forces.
So it kind of became known, I think, to the Iraqi army that we were going to land a large force of Ashawaba.
So, of course, two divisions came, set down in Kuwait to stop us from from landing.
Well, that allowed the ground forces to kind of sweep around.
And so we didn't do the amphibious landing.
We did take a couple of islands.
We took, uh, phalaka island, uh, which was, it was, it was actually very interesting.
Again, a good lesson for me.
So phalaka, uh, had been bombed for like a hundred straight days.
We're twelve hundred Iraqi officers are officers and listed on the phalaka island.
Because it was a kind of a key position before you got up into the, into the waterway.
And, uh, and Navy fighters when they would come back, they'd have to dump their bombs.
So, for, again, like, 90 days or something, they were dropping bombs, ordinance on phalaka.
And phalaka island was only about two inches above sea level.
And it's just flat as it could be.
So the Iraqis at night would, you know, they, the trenches and they'd hide in the trenches as we're dropping bombs on.
So finally, uh, when the time came, the Iraqis surrendered in phalaka.
And we go, we go pick up these guys, twelve hundred of them, and moved them from phalaka to the amphibes.
Uh, before we sent them back to, like Saudi Arabia and then back to quite.
But interestingly enough, with all that bombing, I think the bombs only killed about five Iraqis.
So it showed, you know, we wonder, you know, how, how did the Germans withstand the naval bombardment on Normandy,
and how did the Japanese survive it? Well, the answer is if you dig deep enough, even, you know, a thousand pound bombs,
you know, unless they land right in your head, which apparently would happen to a couple of these guys, you can survive this stuff.
But also the Iraqis, it was interesting to see as I was the Colonel who accepted their surrender, you know, separated the officers from the enlisted.
But now I'm, you know, I'm on the island for several hours, and I started flying back with some of the Iraqis.
And they were, hey man, I'm from Detroit. I came back to Iraq to see my parents actually, you know, I'm, I've been a lot of these guys,
or American Iraqis that had come back and kind of gotten secunded into the, into the Iraqi army, and we're like,
yeah, I really didn't want to be here, and you have a cigarette by the way.
I don't smoke.
That's, that was pretty awesome experience though for you.
And I know that I was a rare guy that volunteered to do argue platoons, because there was actually missions that happened, you know,
the guys that were, the guys that were in the seal teams that weren't Somalia, a bunch of them came off argue platoons.
Right. And I was like, okay, if that's where I got to go. And so I volunteered for argue platoons, but we're really helped me out,
was then I was working with, I was working with the Marine Corps, and we were, you know, building relationships with the Marine Corps,
but just understanding, look, when you're in a seal pitune, in the 90s, you didn't understand anything about the rest of them,
Bellatari. It was like, hey, I got a 60-man-platoon, we'll take on the world.
Then I learned, oh, this is a battalion. This is how this is going to work.
This is the way we can work together with them. This is the support that we can give them.
So it was very useful and very helpful for me. I was very glad. I was a calm guy, so I made all the comms plan and learned how to,
how to communicate with all the different forces. It was very, very helpful for me to do those.
I did two art deployments and learned a lot about the conventional forces, which was real lucky.
You get done with that, and now you finally get your time in Monterey.
Yeah, finally, I think the fifth set of orders. I finally got to Monterey, so I went up there for two years and set up the special operations,
low intensity conflict, the solar curriculum, and then ended up graduating from that curriculum.
But also took the time that's when I had an opportunity to write my thesis on the principles of special operations,
with the theory of special operations. And Monterey was great time, because I've been deployed for ten months on the amphibious
ready group, and frankly, been running hard for several years. And my wife, while I was deployed, my wife had a third child.
So I came back. My oldest boy had been born when I was going on my first employment.
He was born in a week later, I grew on an employment. Number two, some was born in the Philippines and jungle general.
Literally, that's what we call it, jungle general. And in fact, a couple of years ago, when I was the so-com commander,
we went back out of the Philippines, and I went down to Zamboine, and my wife got a driver from Anila to go back to the Subic Bay.
She hadn't been there in thirty-some odd years. So I'm down in Zamboine for a couple of days.
I finally come back up to Manila to pick her up, and I get into the hotel room. And she goes,
do you know that John was born in a quansit hut? She goes, I mean, he was a quansit hut.
Yeah, that's all we had was a quansit hut. And so, I mean, jungle general was a series of quansit huts.
And so, like I said, number two, some was born there. And then we waited quite a while, and finally, for our third child,
we thought, hey, we got this all figured out. My wife got pregnant. I'm going to go on a six month deployment.
I'll come back, you know, I'll have time to get ready for the baby to be born.
Of course, my six month deployment turns into ten months, and I come back and my daughter's a month old.
Like, hey, I think that worked out okay.
But we worked out okay for one of you.
Yeah, that's right. But then we did get up to Manarey, and that was good time.
So, out there is where your thesis became a book.
And the book is called Spacops, Case Studies and Special Operations Warfare Theory and Practice.
I'm going to jump into this a little bit. Call Von Closquits. In his book on war noted,
the defensive form of warfare is intrinsically stronger than the offense.
It contributes resisting power, the ability to preserve and protect oneself.
Thus, the defense generally has a negative aim that of resisting the enemies will.
If we are to mount an offensive to impose our will, we must develop enough force to overcome the inherent
superiority of the enemy's defense.
Cosquits theory of war states that to, quote, defeat stronger, the stronger form of warfare,
an army's best weapon is superior numbers.
In this sense, superiority of numbers admittedly is the most important factor in the outcome of
an engagement. So long as it is not, so long as it's great enough to counterbalance all other contributing circumstances.
It thus follows that as many troops as possible should be brought into the engagement at the decisive point.
So you start off with that, which people always ask me. I've covered just about every,
well, I've covered a lot of war theory, and I never covered Closquits. And one of the reasons I never covered Closquits
are having yet, I've covered a little bit, but is because I like LaDelle Hark better of course.
And so apparently you feel the same way.
Continue on with your book. No soldier would argue the benefit of superior numbers, but if they were the most important factor,
how could 69 German commandos have defeated a Belgian force of 650 soldiers protected by the largest,
most extensive fortress of its time, the fort at even a mal, which is a special operations,
paratroopers, landed with gliders on this. And as you just said, 69 German paratroopers
took on this massive Belgian force and one. How can special operations force that has inferior numbers?
And the disadvantage of attacking the stronger form of warfare gained superiority over the enemy
to understand this paradoxes to understand special operations. Relative superiority, relative superiority
is a concept crucial to the theory of special operations. Simply stated relative superiority is a condition
that exists when an attacking force generally smaller gains a decisive advantage over a larger or well-defended enemy.
The value of which the concept of relative superiority lies in its ability to illustrate which positive forces influence the success of a mission
and to show how the frictions of war affect the achievement of the goal.
This section will define the three basic properties of relative superiority and describe how those properties are revealed in combat.
And then you talk about relative superiority as achieved at a pivotal moment in the engagement.
Once relative superiority is achieved, it must be sustained in order to guarantee victory.
And if relative superiority is lost, it is difficult to regain again.
And then you go on to explain what you already mentioned, the six principles of special operations,
simplicity, security, repetitions, surprise, speed and purpose.
And the book, what this book consists of is case studies that describe and show how all these things come into play.
So that's, you made pretty good time of your session up there in Monterey.
Yeah, you know, it was, to your point, you take advantage of the opportunity you get.
I found studying at postgraduate school was, yeah, I'd been an operator for 15 years.
It was great to actually now to kind of get an opportunity to get intellectually engaged and there was some phenomenal faculty and professors up there.
But when I'm on the side of the right of thesis, I'd read a lot of clouds, what's in, you know, clouds, what's kind of talks about the principles of war, you know,
everybody has these ideas of various principles of war.
And clouds, what's this point there is like the defense is always going to be stronger than the offense,
because the defense just has to preserve and protect.
While the offense has to impose its will upon the enemy.
So that was the, but then if that's true, then why does soft work?
So I went in there initially looking for the principles of special operations.
So I, I went and visited all these places and talked to all these commandos and, and the, but I was visiting,
I was in, in Germany meeting with Lieutenant Vitsich who was the, at the time, with the Lieutenant that read, read the raid on a BNML.
And Colin Kilrain, who was a young lieutenant at the time who is now a vice-abmal,
Colin Kilrain was stationed up in Ekinferty with the Compsfembers.
So Colin was going to be my, my translator.
And so we linked up and went all over Europe, interviewing these guys.
It was great, but we get down to talk to Lieutenant Vitsich.
And it was hard to find these guys, because again, this said that there was some sense,
because they had been in the German military, was there some Nazi overtones, etc, etc.
Didn't, not the case with Lieutenant Vitsich because he had gone on to work in the West German army and retired as a colonel.
But nonetheless, I think there was always some concern about, you know, some of the wartime efforts.
But finally, Colin tracks him down. So we go to Vizim and, and I'm sitting there for three hours,
and I have created this list of questions for him.
And, and he's a very stern fellow and, and, and it was very cautious early on.
And so as we're talking, and I'm, I'm asking you these questions.
Colin is translating them and he's answering them.
Short, almost bluntly,
doesn't seem particularly happy that I'm there, but he's trying to be gracious.
And finally, about three hours into it, I turned to Colin, I said,
ask the colonel if he's the one that actually developed the plan for how the demolition was going to be used on the surface of a better male.
And in perfect English, he says, yes, I was.
And we continue on in English for the next hour or so.
He'd been vetting me. He wanted to find out whether or not this was a serious, but it was the colonel.
So he says, at one point in time, I'm kind of talking about this. He says,
so you are trying to develop a theory here.
And at the time, I was not. I was just trying to identify principles.
And I thought, huh, he says, I think you are working on a theory.
You need to flesh out the theory.
And so I went back and spent the next year thinking,
okay, how do you take, not just the principles, but what is the theory of special, why do special operations work when they shouldn't work based on kind of clouds with some lot of others?
And then again, the case studies kind of bore out why they work in certain areas and why they don't.
But the study of that paid dividends for me after 9.11 because every single time, I reviewed a mission.
And I figured at one point in time that I had touched about 10,000 missions over the course of my time as the deputy commander J. Sock and the J. Sock commander.
Where, you know, you're either commanding them, you're overseeing them or you're reviewing them because, you know, every concept of operation early on had to come to a general officer.
So I would review every concept of operation as well.
And I always ask myself, okay, we're making this too hard. Is it a simple plan carefully concealed, repeatedly rehearsed, and executed with surprise, speed, and purpose.
And that was that was the essence of this recognizing that the frictions of war,
and the chance of uncertainty should happen is going to try to knock your plan off this kind of apex that it's on. And the only thing that's going to keep it upright is the courage and the boldness and the perseverance of the men that are that are fighting to keep this plan upright.
And as I would think through all of these concepts, so I'd see the con up, I'd say, we're making this too complicated, guys.
Make it make it easier, make it simpler. I mean, I was always trying to get to the simplest approach that you couldn't always get there, but you wanted to do that because you realized the simpler was the less chance.
The less risk you were going to have, the less chance of things could go wrong.
And that was just always, you know, in the back of my mind, then of course, the bin Laden raid comes along.
And we adhered to the the thesis, the theory is closely as we could. I said, like, I won't, we're going to flesh out of this out. We are going to keep this plan.
And so we're going to go from point A to point B in a helicopter.
Get on the ground just like we do. You know, we've done thousands of times before. We're not going to make it complicated. We'll get the bad guy. We'll put him on a helicopter and take him on. That's it.
Oh, by the way, now we're going to repeat this thing. We're going to rehearse rehearse rehearse rehearse. We're going to keep it confidential. So nobody else knows about it. And then when the day comes, do the mission.
We will have surprise, speed, and got nose we had purpose.
So, you know, that was just the way I tended after my time of Monterey tended to look at every single mission we did.
You get done with Monterey. And then what's next?
So after Monterey, I went back down to Naval Special Warfare Command for about a year waiting to take command.
And I was training officer down there for a year just to have been in position holding a holding position if you will until I took command of Sealteen 3.
Is that when you did the project where you're kind of looking at the next generation of warfare?
So in between that was really when I was the Chief of Staff. So I left Sealteen 3 and then became the Chief of Staff at Group 1, which for your listeners overseas all the Sealteen on the West Coast.
And that's when we really began to develop this idea of thinking back to La Delhart.
I mean, it really was, why do we have to do things the way we have always done them? Because even up till, you know, 1998, we were still doing the way things the way we had done in Vietnam.
Even even the guys on the elite East Coast Sealteen had not developed too much beyond kind of the standard Sealteen size.
And by the way, nobody else gets into the platoon, but a platoon guy. You gotta have gone through Buds.
And it was like, what if you're going to tap into some wire or something? Where is the pencil net geek guy that you're going to bring along?
So we can't bring him along because he doesn't know how to ride in the Zodiac.
But two life jackets on him, stick him in the Zodiac because you're bringing this guy along. And then of course, everyone else had taken over a war com when I became the Commodore.
And he'd seen things work on the East Coast. And so he really wanted to take a look at Naval Special War for even more broadly.
So how do we have sniper elements? Well back in the day when I came in, the sniper was in your platoon.
You know, the radioman was in your platoon. Everything was inside the platoon organization.
Well then we began to say, hey, yeah, but your breachers. Well, that's one of the guys that the platoon was a designated breacher. One of the guys that the platoon was a, was the sniper.
Well, why don't we take guys that do a lot of sniper work and make them the world class snipers and then world class breachers.
That evolved and then all said 9, 11 hits and it went on steroids.
But before I jumped over a part when you were sealed of sealed team three, one thing I used to tell guys all the time was if we were doing an off, if we're doing a water up, I'd say, hey, if you're in the water, it's a real world up because if you're in the water, you can die period.
And you bow died.
About that.
And the three as the commanding officer up in, was it Moral Bay? Moral Bay. Cap size didn't ribb. Yeah, that was not a good day.
Except I came out of a lot of some of it was good day.
Yeah, we went up there. It was one of the platoon. It was doing their final exercise before deploying.
And as you know, the commanding officer generally comes up for the FTX, the final training exercise.
So we'd gone up to Moral Bay myself and the commanding master. And the platoon was still doing some training that we're going to do the FTX, I think, following day.
And there had been a storm off the coast. So Moral Bay's got this thing that looks a little bit like the rocket Gibraltar kind of right in the middle Moral Bay.
But what it does is it funnels the waves.
So the storm surge off the coast had created these huge waves breaking coming into Moral Bay.
Well, there was a place inside Moral Bay where the seals were trained. And so they were kind of in their zodiacs doing their regular training.
But I noticed, as I was getting out to go with the platoon, that I saw two ribs out there. They didn't belong to me. They belonged to the special boat unit.
But I'm kind of looking thinking, WTF, what are these guys playing on doing? Because I'm looking at 20 foot waves breaking here.
And so I'm with one of the seals that said, run me out to that boat out there.
So they zip me out there and I get on the rib and I'm talking to a young lieutenant surface warfare officer.
And I said, so what's planned here, son? And he says, we're going to go out through the waves.
You're going to go through those waves.
So I've got to plan. I got my CMC fees on the jetty. He's timing the waves.
We're actually not going to go straight out through.
And we're going to cut around near the jetty just as it's breaking.
And by the way, all my guys are trained in Codiac. We can do this.
Okay, well, give me a life jacket. I'll go with you.
And of course, there are two seals in the back of the boat. Tom Reinville and Juno Polusa.
And so Juno, you may know, has got quite a sense of humor. He's like, hey, sir, come on. Let's go.
And he said, you know, I didn't have a dry suit on. The water temperature was in the 50s.
And he said, yeah, if we tip, you know, you're going to get off the coldest.
And then don't capsize the boat. So we're in the back of three of us or three seals are kind of in the back of the boat.
And the bolster seats back there. And, you know, we're all kind of timing the waves.
This team values team to do. And Frank, the waves are getting kind of bigger and bigger.
And all of a sudden, the coxon guns it.
Whoa. And he had straight for the wave.
And I mean, we hit this first wave. We go straight up the first wave at about 30 knots.
And I literally am counting like he do when you jump out on the static line. I go 1,000, 2,000, 3000, 4000.
Bam! We hit in between the first and the second wave.
Well, the ballman he goes flying off. He's lost one of the engines.
Now he does the right thing. The coxon swings the boat around because we've got no choice now.
So he guns it to try to beat the second wave. Well, the second wave, you know, is waves tend to get bigger and bigger.
The second wave is probably 30 somewhat feet. And he hits it again. And we hit it full speed. And we go up in the air.
And this time, I literally count to 5,000, 1,000, 2,000, 3000, 4000, 4000, 5000.
5,000, we hit. It's like holy shit. Hit the boat cracks. Guys are thrown out.
And now all of a sudden, the wave of the day comes, you know.
So the boat is facing the sub, but now we got no power.
And that third wave just lifts that boat up. And I can remember seeing it. As the boats get lifted up.
And, you know, there's water coming over the 33 foot boat. And there's another, you know, eight foot of water coming over the top of the other thing.
And it just bang. Throw us right on the back.
Well, I'm underneath the boat. And I'm tangled up in shot line. And you know, shot line is this kind of very thin nylon line.
It's wrapped around my neck. I've got somebody's weapon is wrapped around me.
And I am, I mean, I am completely tangled underneath this rib.
And again, much like, you know, times that you have in the teams.
Most of the times you can, you can get your way out of these things.
And, and so I'm under the boat. And I'm, I'm trying to extricate myself in this thing.
But it's, it's choking me. And I'm losing air.
And I remember thinking myself. So this is how it's going to end.
I mean, all this time, I'm going to die under this damn boat. And I remember saying to myself,
Well, I'm never going to see Georgian, Bill, John, or Kelly again, my wife and the re-kids.
And, and as I am struggling, again, to this day, I actually, I used the word in the book,
miraculously, I'm untangled.
That should never have happened. I mean, I was so wrapped up in shot line in somebody's sling in the bolster.
And I'm all sitting in the bolster seat, things. And all of a sudden, I'm loose.
And I shoot to the surface. And, well, now, I'm in the second set of waves coming again.
And I'm thinking, oh, I'm not going to make this. And there's two seals who had seen this,
seen the boat flip over. They're in a zodiac in their UDT's from trucks.
And they come haul and ask out of nowhere. And they're yelling at me.
Skipper, skipper. I can hear them. And I'm thinking, you better get her fast.
Cause I'm not going to survive this next wave. And they come, I don't even get in the boat.
The guy does a literal U-turn, you know, a sliding turn. I grab the side of the, the, the, the, the, the sponsor there.
Hang on. And I can remember the prop is, is hit my general boots that I've got on.
And they pull me out of the wave just before it crashes over the top of me.
And they had pulled the Tom Rain, another group had pulled Tom Rainville out.
And they went back to the second chance. I mean, it was once again, that could have been the end of my career.
And, you know, there were people that thought highly enough. And they went back.
I mean, they did the investigation. Everybody, we talked to everything.
And the, the teams to their credit. And they did the investigation said, you know,
you know, this is what we expect of our operators. The lieutenant who was the, the surface warfare officer.
I mean, we expect them to push the envelope. Yeah, this is, and a lot of times you're going to have these expectations.
Guys, going to push the envelope and it's not always going to work out well.
So to the credit of, you know, the admiral and the Commodore, we all from a career standpoint survived it.
And so we've been fast forward again about 20, some odd years after the book comes out, I get an email.
And, and the guy says, sir, you know, this is so-and-so, lieutenant Jones.
Of course, I didn't name the name the young lieutenant. He said that I won't go into too much details.
But he said, I love the story. It's exactly how I remembered it.
And just wanted to reconnect with you and say thanks for everything. And he had, again, because he, he had been the boat all I see.
By Navy rigs, the boat I see actually is the guy responsible. But I, the thing that I admired about this young man is, so he loses the boat.
And, you know, he's got to see, I mean, one, he does the right thing. He makes sure he's got a head count on guys.
He gets guys out. He gets a metovac to the hospital. And he takes a meet charge of the situation.
It gets the boat off the bottom. Does everything right after the disaster.
And you've seen it before. Sometimes guys have a disaster like that, and they just, they're crushed by it.
And they can't think and they can't operate and they can't take a man.
The young lieutenant did exactly what he was supposed to do. I mean, sometimes bad things happen.
And then you got to kind of, you got a man up and get the job done. And he did.
And I think the investigation board saw that and gave him another opportunity.
You're, you know, like I, I look at your life and I think, you know, really had some good luck in his life.
But also reading your book, I think, damn.
Because one of the next stories in your career was you basically got drawn and cordured by your parachutes, which,
I, you had a parachute.
So you take over the, you take over the, what's called Naval Special Warfare Group One,
which is the person that's in charge of all the seal teams on the west coast and all their training,
Manning and equipping and overseeing and giving them guidance.
And you go out on a parachute jump for whatever reason, because that's what we do.
And you, you, you, you, you about got drawn and cordured from the story.
It sounds like you about got ripped in half.
That's about right.
Yeah, so this was a routine parachute jump and, and I'm not a good jumper, not a good free faller, but you know, something you got to do.
So we go out and launch out of North Island on a C130 and get up to about 13,000 feet, and it's going to be again a routine jump.
Ram comes down and it's something that's one of these chamber of commerce days here in Southern California, not a cloud in the sky.
I remember you can see Mexico, you can see the Pacific Ocean, you can see the strand, it's like, that's a beautiful day.
And I'm a fourth in the line of March so to speak.
So the guys go out and something else goes through the call, I go up behind these guys and I'm falling flat and stable and looking good.
And there's two guys off to my left and one guy off to my right.
And I'm watching the sky off to my right and he's starting to kind of drift underneath me and I'm kind of watching him, but then he's stabilized.
Next thing I know the guy to my left is right underneath me and I check my altitude later.
It's about 500 feet. He pulls his parachute and in relative terms, course I'm moving to the 120 miles an hour.
He's stopped. I can't get out of the way and I hit his parachute.
It's kind of like hitting an airbag I would assume.
And so it dases me and now I'm spinning out of control.
As you know what I should have done is gotten stable again.
Look, check my altitude and I pulled my rip cord.
But, you know, things being what they were.
I'm spinning, I'm days, I'm like, hey, I just know I got to reach for my rip cord or this isn't going to end well.
So I reached my rip cord, pull it.
Well, I'm in a head down attitude spinning. Pilot shoot comes out, wraps around one leg.
The riser comes out, wraps around another leg.
Now I'm completely tangled up in the parachute. I remember playing myself.
Yeah, it doesn't look so good.
So, you know, I'm sitting here trying to get my way out of the parachute or at least get the damn thing to open.
Well, the good news is it opens.
The bad news is when a parachute opens, you know, it blossoms.
So one riser went one way, one went the other way and it snapped my pelvis into.
Broke it by about four or five inches.
Fraction, my back ripped the muscles out of my stomach that's attached to the,
the boony part of your pelvis and ripped the muscles out of legs.
And I ended up about, about two miles from the drop zone.
Now I'm always quick to point out, like this kind of injury,
pales in comparison to what we saw in Iraq, what we saw in Afghanistan.
And the lessons, you know, from the jump, we're not so much about the accident.
But it was really more about the fact that, you know, at the time,
you're pointing out, I'm the Commodore.
I mean, I'm one of the senior guys in the West Coast.
I've been in the business for 20 some ideas.
I'd had a lot of near-death experiences.
I was pretty savvy. I thought I was invincible sort of thing.
And the next thing, you know, you're in the ER in the hospital and you're laid up.
And you realize it takes a whole lot of people to get you back up going again.
My wife became my nurse because once I got out of the hospital, you know, you got to get shots and make sure you don't.
You're blooded in clot, Admiral Eric Olson made sure I was able to stay in the Navy and back then.
That was touching go because, you know, you're pretty serious accident.
By the way, you're a Navy seal.
What good are you going to do if you can't walk and you can't run and team guys being team guys.
They came by, gave me the right amount of harassment, the right amount of encouragement.
And it really did take a lot of people to kind of get me up and go in again.
And it really was about just this remarkable, you know, group of folks that we are honored to be part of and how they took care of me right about time I needed.
And of course, that was what July 2001.
It was.
Yeah, so I was laid up about, and then of course, 9-11 happens.
And I'm actually kind of recuperating in my house.
And we'd wheeled the hospital bed into my house that her and Coronado, and they were at the Naval Base when 9-11 was happening.
And, and, and about of month or so later, I got called to go to the White House and weighing down in and for our listeners, he was a retired four star general who had run US special operations command.
He got asked by President Bush to be in charge of the office combatting terrorism, which was had been newly established after 9-11.
And down he gets hold of me and says, hey, I like you to come work for me.
And he knew I'd been in the accident and of course, that point time, and I can't go back to an operational team as much as I wanted to and I thought, well, you know, this will maybe give me a chance to heal.
And while I got to the White House didn't have any time to any rehab, you know, you just went right to work.
But I had to park on what was called the Olympics, which was outside the White House.
And it was about, you know, 600 and half a mile maybe into the White House every day.
And that became my P.T. was getting out of the car and going, man, that's a long way to walk, you know.
But a little bit of your body heals and did back to work.
So now you're, and this is a, he said something that reminded me, so I've worked for Adam and Wichweir.
Well, I was his aide, not at this time, but one thing that he had gotten when September 11th happened, he was working to acquisition, right?
At the Pentagon or something like that. And I, he told me, you know, his attitude was, okay.
I want to go to a team, I want to deploy, which is what every team guy thinks, but he just said, you know, okay, well, this is my foxhole.
Acquisitions. I'm going to get money for the teams. That's what I'm going to do. And that was sort of the same attitude that it looked like you had.
I was like, okay, this is what I'm going to do. Well, that's going to do it to the best of my ability.
You, you do talk about, um, there's, there's a hostage situation. Was it Martin and Grott?
Yeah, Martin and Grisha, Barnum.
It was interesting and, you know, get the book. It's, it's fascinating how you put that together.
But one thing that I found interesting about it, it's a good lesson learned for people is it was something that was kind of on the, you know, on the back burner and people weren't focused on it.
And here you had two Americans that were being held hostage.
And like I said, it was on the back burner and you sort of became a champion for, hey, we need to do something about this.
And that had a huge impact. And eventually, you know, a rescue mission was undertaken, unfortunately, the husband was killed, but the wife survived.
And, but one person can make a huge difference. And, and you can be, you can be a champion for a cause and have a real impact, which is, and you know, it's not like you would have seen your guy there or anything like that.
But you, you grabbed onto this cause. You know, it was the right thing to do and let it. I thought that was a, that's a powerful thing to think about.
Well, particularly, you know, I was in the White House. So, you're, you are close to the, you know, the decision makers on these things.
And, and I realized that it had an opt-in. Now, I'm a Navy captain, so I'm fairly senior at the time.
But when the burn-ups had been held hostage for six or seven months before I even arrived there, and I was stunned frankly that we, the United States,
It's not that we weren't doing anything, but I didn't think we were doing enough. And, you know, having been in the kind of hostage rescue business, I knew what was, the art of the possible.
And, and so there was, I think, all the hostage subcommittee, which by virtue of my position, I was in charge of it. And it was an interagency committee.
But to your point, Jogger, yeah, you have an opportunity, no matter where you are in the chain of command, you can make a difference.
And I was fortunate enough to be able to get in a pretty present bush and to, you know, have the ear of Dr. County Rice, who was an national security advisor and ambassadors from that perch in the White House,
to be able to try to orchestrate something on behalf of the burn-ups. And so it was a pretty fulfilling, again, we were, we were sorry, we couldn't, you know, get Martin rescued, but I remember I never, never met Gracia, but there's several months after, after she had been rescued.
And I was just sitting in my cubicle there in the White House and the phone rang, and she was on the other end and, you know, thanking me. That's like, you know, thank me.
I mean, this is, I'm sorry we couldn't rescue your husband. She was just, she's a remarkable woman, you know, just her faith sustained her through, you know, that year and a half in the jungle.
But, but yeah, the best thing about working the White House was almost like the issue with a Pentagon, and this really did serve me well, because two years in the White House, nine new how the White House worked.
And so when I became Deputy J. Sock Commander and then the J. Sock Commander, now you know how to get decisions made, you know what, what the inter-ADC process works, it looks like.
You know, who all the players are, and in fact most of the players, a lot of the players that I had served with on the National Security Council staff, then a couple years later there, there's somebody else important.
And so you can back to those relationships, you can leverage those relationships and a positive fashion.
So understanding how the White House worked, and also the great relationships I had built served me well, and a number of my commands.
When you in between being the Deputy J. Sock Commander and leaving the White House, did you go to Sockier for that? So you did a tour at Sockier, was that like your standard two year tour?
It was two year tour, but I was fortunate at the time. I had a great Army Colonel of Work for me named Stu Bridden, and Stu came to me with this idea that we needed to stand up a NATO special operations force.
Well, the folks in NATO, the bureaucrats did not want to do that, but Stu understood how to make this happen. And once again, I was fortunate. General Jim Jones was the U.C. Commander, the SAC-UR Commander at the time.
We pitched the plan to him, and he supported it. And as a result, we were able to stand up in 2006, the NATO Special Operations Force, that today has got 22, 24 countries that are part of NATO's soft.
And of course, they deployed with his overseas in Afghanistan, and continued to be a great partner. And a lot of that credit goes right back to Stu Bridden and the great work he did.
From there, you go to J. Sock. You take over as the Deputy Commander. And I think you throw out in sea stories. You give an example, which I think is a...
Well, it's pretty important story. There's a mission going on. You're in the... you're in the talk, the TAC-Coperation Center. And here we go. I'm going to go to the book. This is from Sea Stories. Unbeknownst to me, Lieutenant Colonel Bill Coltrup.
The Sea Squadron Commander and Colonel Jim Hickey from First Brigade 4th Infantry Division had maneuvered farther up the dirt road from Wolverine 1, which was one target, two another small house designated Wolverine 2. As I watched the ISR feed from the Westcam and listened to the radios, the visual and verbal didn't match up. Wolverine 1 appeared reasonably quiet. But the radio calls from Coltrup sounded like they were moving rapidly on a target.
It sounds like they're on targetly. I don't see any movement outside the house. I motioned to the Jock non-commission officer who sat at the end of the long wooden table that made a horseshoe around the ISR screen.
So you're sitting there watching this thing unfold the ISR's, what's the feed that's coming from the aircraft overhead. He was also on the headset seeing what I was seeing, which was nothing.
I raised my hands in the universal sign of WTF and he shrugged and called back ISR's on the target. I don't know where the squadron is sir. I hated to call the squadron in the middle of an operation.
And that's an important point from my perspective. I was a Platoon Commander and I was a Force Commander and a Platoon and then a Tasking Commander.
And the fact that you weren't jumping on there, hey, where are you at? What's going on? What's going on? What's going on? Is is I'd say if you've got a boss, you got at least a 50% chance of a boss that wants to know exactly where you are at all time.
And it's not fun and it doesn't help. And so here you are. You say I hated to call the squadron in the middle of an operation. It's the last thing any tactical guy on the ground wants a call from his boss.
And the important comfortable in the jock 50 miles away from the action. Still, it was our responsibility to manage the quick reaction force and the medical evacuation of something went wrong on target.
That was hard to do if you didn't have good situational awareness of the mission.
And the truth was, I was curious as to whether this new lead was panning out so they were tracking a lead.
Some somewhat reluctantly, I pushed the talk, I pushed the talk button and reached out to Coltrip Bill, are you on target? Yes, sir. Coltrip responded somewhat excitedly. We don't see you on ISR.
There was a pause on Coltrip's end. Sir, we are on Wolverine 2, just down the road from the original target. And we have Jackpot. Jackpot. Jackpot was the code word, meaning they had captured the objective.
But first, I assumed Coltrip meant cases that who you were looking for.
But suddenly, it occurred to me that the tone of Coltrip's voice indicated something more significant.
Jackpot. Do you mean little jackpot or big jackpot? Big jackpot, Coltrip answered.
And going as this goes forward, big jackpot was set on.
So these guys had just captured Saddam. And I was actually, I was in Iraq at the time. And so we had found out, I think we had found out, we found out really quickly.
One of the guys that we were working, one of the OGA guys we were working out with was one of the early interrogators on them and come down.
And we got them. So as much as I know you were trying to keep the secret, there was, it didn't stay so long. That one didn't stay secret very long.
I know there's a, there's a, before we jump in a little bit about Saddam.
So when you, when you were running that earlier, I mentioned you were running this project of like looking at the future of warfare and what we could do. And I was part of that.
So I was, I knew it's like five of us and you were basically taking us and sending us to all these very cool, probably some of the best schools I ever went to. I went to lock picking and car stealing and just all these really cool school schools to get us prepared to do.
Like you said, operations from a totally different perspective. And I remember I sat through your brief a couple times.
And you would brief, you know, some senior officers and you'd say, hey, listen, in the sealed teams, we do direct action, but we have T-Lam's now. And so do we really need to do direct shot or all we really going to have to do direct action missions when we've got T-Lams.
And we've got another thing we do is, special reconnaissance. Well, are we really going to do need to do special reconnaissance when we've got satellites and, and we've got, you know, UAV capabilities are coming on board.
And you know, I remember like I said, I was a young guy and thinking, okay, well, I need to transfer to this new format. We're not going to do direct action anymore.
I think the next time I saw you as in Baghdad, you came down to Camp Jenny Pose. You were, we were, I was jokped up literally about to go out on my whatever 50th or whatever direct action mission.
And, and I thought it was funny. I kind of smiled at myself said, well, looks like we're still doing it.
I thought I was doing it. But, but this mission got Saddam and then, I mean, you do, it's a very interesting perspective. How, how crazy is it to sit here and talk to you.
You are interacting with Saddam when he got captured and you detailed it in the book. But I mean, just some some high level thoughts. What was that like detailed with this freaking horrible, horrible, sadistic person.
Yeah, it was very interesting because the, you know, when we first captured him, I mean, he was pop-up, he was arrogant.
When, when, when Bill called back, when Bill called to call back and said, they were got a big jackpot. Could your point you had asked about case or case was the guy we were the facilitator.
So we were trying to get the facilitator who we thought was going to lead us to Saddam. Well, they had gotten case and in case it had kind of pointed them towards Saddam and they opened the spider hole you've seen the picture.
Saddam's in there. So they bring Saddam back to, to crit and, and I'm down and back dead. And, and so now we had a plan.
Okay, what do you do if you get Saddam where I had to call a general abysad who was a cent-com commander called General McCristo, who was my boss back and Tampa.
And, and I had to make plans to, well, we want to verify that Saddam. So I needed to get DNA sent to, you know, the lab and FBI lab and all that sort of thing.
But, but as all this has happened in, the, the JTF commander, General Rick Sanchez, I get the word General Sanchez is outside the job.
I was like, what? I mean, he was the big guy in Iraq down three-star at the time and so, bring him on in. So Sanchez comes in, sits down beside me and says,
I don't understand you got to Saddam, I said, I do not know that yet. I'm not going to call a jackpot until I can see it till we can verify it.
You know how this goes? You know, there are a lot of times we had captured guys who we thought had the right name. The cronyas were different.
People were different. You call a jackpot then you're embarrassed, you know, twenty-five or three or one's not the right guy.
And he says, hey, no, I mean, I, I heard through, you know, through OGA that the, that's got him. I said, well, so he'll be down here in 30 minutes.
You can see for yourself. I think we both just spotted the Lee Khan.
Well, so, so the, about 30 minutes later, the Hellower Rives, well, I mean, I'm busy making phone calls.
So I turned to my chief of staff who I call him, I think, captain Lee at his request.
And I said, hey, go over there. You've got to come back and I'm trusting you tell me what you think it's Saddam or not.
So he and General Sanchez go over there and he comes back from his later goes, sorry, it's Saddam.
Okay, so I know I'm calling Habes and doing my sort of thing. Well, about, you know, half an hour later, I go back over there.
And I remember talking to Sanchez was kind of one of those funny moments. So Saddam has this big beard.
And, and I realized we got to get him cleaned up because we're going to have this kind of press release and everything.
And frankly, it looked like Saddam, even with a big beard. He's got this bulbous nose, everything.
But I figured, well, let's get him cleaned up. So no Iraqis can say it's not Saddam.
So I turned to one of the guys and said, okay, let's get him shaved and get him cleaned up and then we'll take a picture and then we'll be able to compare it.
So as I'm saying, Sanchez turns to me says, I don't know, Bill, do we have the authority to shave him?
As a certain, we had the authority to kill him if he was trying to guess. I think we got the authority to shave. We both got a laugh. I really liked Rick Sanchez. He was a good guy.
So I go off, make some more fun calls. I come back assuming that what had happened was some range or somebody had gotten the shares and was kind of cleaning Saddam.
Why come back? So I'm just got a pair of scissors in the sand and he's clipping his own beard. I'm like, no, let me have this.
Yeah, it's just yeah, pull that away. And he's like, oh, yeah, I was holding it cleaned up.
But the next day was the day when you recall the press conference where the ambassador and Joel Sanchez say, we got him. Well, they hadn't seen him. Sanchez had seen him, but the ambassador hadn't seen him yet.
So they fly out to our place there and bagged at and go to see Saddam and they brought some of the Iraqi leaders with him.
And again, Saddam, I've got him now in a jumpsuit and he's sitting on a cot.
But when they, when the Iraqi leaders came into the room, small room, about the size actually.
I mean, they are yelling at him. They're spit netting him. And he's got this look on his face like boys. I'm still in charge or Saddam. And he kind of motioned to him. He's just Saddam.
Don't you know who I am? I'm looking at thinking, wow. He is he still thinks he's in charge. He's about to find out he's no longer in charge.
So I didn't really want to bring those guys in because I knew this would happen. It was just bolster his ego. So after after they left, I talked to Sanchez, Dr. Ambassador said, so that's it.
I don't want anybody else visiting him. I am responsible for him now.
I mean, and call it General Labs, he will tell you, I'm responsible for him. So here's what I'm telling you. Nobody else visiting.
We will, you know, I will take good care of him, but I don't want him, you know, feel like he's somebody important. So the next 30 days I held onto him.
And in the room, I had an officer and a security guy and a medic and a doctor all the time.
Because he was 67 years old and he had all sorts of health problems.
But it was interesting to watch. As the days and weeks went on and he no longer had his, you know, palaces and no longer had his generals and no longer had his hand made.
He really just became a pathetic old man. And every time I come in, every, I go check on him every day. He'd always stand up to want to talk to me.
And I wouldn't talk to him. And he would talk to the Rangers and the doc. And I told him I said, I don't want anybody to say an award to him.
And he would always ask about El Hefe.
Yeah, El Hefe. And of course, I came in. I made sure my stars were on my name tag, wasn't on. But he knew who I was. I mean, just by, you know, you can end.
So 30 days into it, it was time to move him. And I was really hoping that by this time, you know, the uncertainty had really kind of blossomed. He didn't know that, of course.
And I thought, well, let's see if I can get him to tell the insurgents to stand down.
So we had a plan brought my translator in. And of course, I knew what his answers would be, but I figured I got nothing to lose here.
So I sat down with him and I said, look, you know, the kind of the wars over here. The Americans have come in and we've, and he just kind of nodded.
And I said, but your people are still dying. And you know, you can do one of two things. You can become Benito Mussolini and be the petty dictator or you can do right by your country.
It's not going to end well for you. You got to know that. But tell them to lay down there arm. So we're not killing any more rackets.
And I knew he'd asked me the question that I thought he would ask. He said, if it was you, would you do it?
And I said, look, you know, if it was for the best part of my country, I do what it took to save my country. And he looks at me goes, I don't think so.
He in Arabic, but it was trying to diagnose me. And then I said to him, I said, okay, you're not going to see me again. We're moving you.
And he was like, because we've been taking pretty good care of him. And he was like, oh, this is not a good idea. And so then he starts to get a little talked about, I said, time's done.
And so that night, we undercover darkness removed him to some military police and they held onto him until the trial.
But watching his, again, watching him and his behavior and how it changed when he no longer felt he was in a position of power was, I think important to realize, you know, that's what you do.
You're booked back on bullies. You know, at the end of the day, you stand up to the bullies. And if all they had was the trappings around them, they're, they're not the kind of people that are going to be able to stand up to you for very long.
And you know, he was a function of the generals that supported in and all of the trappings. And when you took that away, he was just a bully.
A sadistic maniacal evil, evil, evil, evil, evil, evil. So you, you get to dumb. And did you think the war was going to be over at that point?
No, because by that point, we'd seen the insurgency begin to build. As you recall, you know, I got there in October of O3. It was interesting. When I got there, the guy I was relieving, it was an Air Force One Star. It was a deputy at J.S.
I'm getting there thinking, hot bang, you know, I finally got to get in the war. And he says, hey, like, you know, some great restaurants in downtown Baghdad. You know, if you, you get to break, go down. There's this place to get some swarm. I'm like, I'm sorry. What?
I was, I said, men of the war is over. And we just got to get sedan, but I mean, everything's kind of over now. I was like, damn. And then a couple weeks later, route Irish blows up and as you know, route Irish never changed after that. Then we started getting guys ambushed.
And again, this was a, the transition period of the war. So my time we got sedan in December, the insurgency was kind of, you know, it was, it was moving pretty strong by then. So we knew that what I'm going to be over any time.
But so I was there too. At that time, the last op that I did, well, we did a couple more, but the last big op that I did was going after Yakube, which was,
the soldiers, one of the soldiers, lieutenant and that, that really made things bad really quickly.
So you, you're the, you're the deputy of J. Sock and how are you just doing like a part port and starboard in Iraq?
Yes, and Afghanistan. So, of course, at this point in time. So this is 2003 for me. You know, we had gone into Afghanistan, kicked the Taliban out, put cars,
and then Afghanistan was kind of for a long time there. It was the other theater that we didn't have much presence there. The only soft presence was a kind of a half a seal squadron at the time.
And, and probably some reserve green braise from from the 20th and 19th group.
Everybody else was in Iraq. And so we got to Iraq, but then in late 2003, General Absate says, hey, look, we need to pick up the pace in Afghanistan.
A little concerned about the Taliban resurgence, etc. So what we would do is, I would go kind of over to theater and, you know, four, five, six months sort of pump and, and I'd spend a couple months in Iraq and then I go to Afghanistan.
So I would bounce back and forth on the plane, you know, fly through all you did, stop there, and then go to Afghanistan.
It's been a couple of weeks there, kind of managing that, pop back to Iraq, and so it was kind of back and forth.
And it was supposed to be generally three months on, three months off, rarely ended up being that when I was the deputy.
It'd be, you know, four, five months back for a couple months back out, and so we just kind of flip, pop back and forth.
And at some point in time, General Christle kind of came over and really began to focus on Iraq and then moved me to Afghanistan.
And so myself and the other deputy then kind of began to rotate more and more in Afghanistan.
But that took a while.
When did you take over as Commander, Jay Sock?
2008.
Did you spend, it started spending more time in Iraq? Oh yeah. So yeah, I remember at the time, we had developed the capability to really be able to kind of command and control remotely at that point.
We built up the, the Joc and in Fort Brag to be in a position where the ISR was good enough and you could have stayed as the commander, you could have stayed in Fort Brag.
You know, let the kernels and maybe the one stars kind of run things, but you know, the way that was going to happen.
I mean, you got to be forward if you're going to command.
So yeah, I mean, a week or so after I took command, I went out to Iraq and then settled down there for six months, some months that I remember what it was.
And then, periodically, I bounced over to Afghanistan, just to kind of keep things moving over there.
And then in 2009, by this time, General Patricia taking over Suncom, and he said, hey, look, yeah, we really need to have you, the Jay Sock commander shift your flag to have
me to Afghanistan. So, so then I would say prior to that it was probably three quarters of my time in Iraq, a quarter in Afghanistan.
2009 comes, it just reversed. Then I, you know, three quarters of my time in Afghanistan about a quarter of my time in Iraq.
You got a, you got a section in C stories that I think I'm not going to say there's a typical mission, but I mean, there's a little bit of a typical mission.
It's what you mentioned already, you know, you do something over and over again, repetitively.
And I thought this was a, this one pretty pretty concise little, quote, typical mission.
Going to the book in a cloud of dust, the heelos lifted off from an airfield in western Iraq and within minutes were an
type formation screaming across the desert just 50 feet off the ground two minutes later, the next, the next call came across in the border.
A drone flying high overhead captured the scene is the four heelos,
heelos lifted a large berm separating Iraq from Syria. It was broad daylight and there was no hiding from view. If the Syrian air defense detected heelos, either visually or on radar,
they would immediately open fire with surface to air missiles or anti aircraft guns. The Syrians were our allies, but not our friends.
One minute to touch down from above the two blackhawk gunships took the lead and immediately began to separate one taking the north side of
Godee as compound the other the south they would provide gunfire support for the assaulters. The view from the drone shifted away from the approaching heelos
and onto the compound. In the large courtyard seven men hearing the noise of the inbound heelos began to run excitingly looking for cover grabbing their guns ready to fight.
On screen Roger Votel responded watching as the heelos came into view,
barely missing the outside wall the lead heelos flared. It's nose arching upward tailroader down as it stopped in mid air and landed hard on the ground inside the courtyard.
Shots fired, shots fired, came the familiar refrain. The operators poured out of the first heelos and immediately were engaged by Godee and his men.
The next heelos was seconds behind executing the same aerial maneuver landing just feet from the first aircraft. Outside the wall the last two heelos set down,
the soldiers rushing off the aircraft and taking up security positions to ensure that none of Godee is men escape the assault.
Shots fired, shots fired, the operators inside the courtyard spread out, sweeping forward toward Godee.
The rounds flying both ways. There was no way out. One by one Godee is men fell and within minutes the fight was over.
Cowering unarmed in the small tent in the middle of the compound were several young children and a woman.
The drone overhead watched as the operators went from dead man to dead man looking for their target.
Minutes later came the call, Jackpot. I say again, Jackpot. Roger Votel answered a smile coming across his face.
This mission had been a long time coming. On target the chaos was subsiding, the gun fired stopped, but the clock was ticking.
By now the Syrians were aware the Americans had crossed the border. It was time to go.
So picking up the body of Abu Godee, the assaulters exited the compound, boarded the heelos, and within three minutes were back in Iraq.
The total time of the mission, 17 minutes.
But you're right. Typical mission. As you well know, this was at one point in time.
I think we were doing between 20 and 25 missions a night in Iraq with the whole force, not one entity, but the entire force.
And they all followed pretty much the same sort of method of operation that you either went in by heavow, or you went in by ground, ground assault.
And of course the great thing about Iraq from a tactical standpoint, from a commander standpoint, is you're driving to the objective.
If you're in Baghdad or most of the old or pick up place, you drive 500 feet from the objective. The guys get out, you know, the guys put up blocking positions. The assault force comes in, breaks the door and way they go.
And yeah, I would go out with the guys periodically and we did four or five targets a night. Just not there. Nope, not there. Nope. And eventually you get the bad guy.
And then of course the heelos we use mainly for getting out into, you know, a little further out, but that particular mission.
But I'll look at you. It was probably one of the most notorious facilitators and we just could never get to him. And he was the guy that was bringing in all the fighters, foreign fighters from outside Iraq.
And he would funnel them in through across the border and into al Qaeda in Iraq, we called him at the time.
But he was elusive. And finally when we finally got an opportunity to get him.
And I was briefing President Bush on the video. And it was interesting to see, you know, it was great because the president was very decisive.
And I was fortunate. And of course, my time is both the commander in the deputy. I had both President Bush and President Obama. And I will offer as different as they may have been from a personality standpoint.
They were both very decisive when it came to giving you authority to go get the bad guys. And this one, you know, they remember President Bush coming around the table with the, you know, the Secretary of Defense Secretary of State.
And I also thumbs up. And away we went. And again, from the, so I gave a vote tell you, you, your timeline, you go.
And he was in Iraq at the time. And the next thing I know, you know, 17 minutes, I mean, 17 minutes from the time they launched time across the border, get the objective and back.
That was. I remember when I, when I reported back the White House, they're like, I'm sorry, what?
It's done. It's done. That's really done.
That's building a good reputation for the trip.
Oh, the macro.
In the midst of all this stuff you got going on, you get, you could hit with the, the Mayor's Gallabama and Captain Phillips. And what's interesting, I remember I used to tell these young
Junior officers and platoon commanders and task unit commanders.
If you think these operations are going to show up on your door and like, okay, cool, the world is going to execute it.
Every one of them is is like a soap opera to try and get it together. And you have to kind of force these operations to happen. And, and so you've got all that going on. And then here comes this.
The Mayor's Gallabama.
And it's great. You got to read the book. There's all these different assets. You got people, guys moving from different theaters and guys from the States coming out.
The Mayor assets, you got Navy assets, ships and logistics for all those pieces. This is a massive operation. And again, I love your tone of voice when you read it in the audio book.
You keep, you keep saying, it's a lifeboat.
It's almost comical.
And I just went to the UDTC, New Zealand and Fort Pierce Florida, where they have the lifeboat.
They got it there.
I haven't seen it all yet.
Yeah, yeah.
Great. And of course, we got some connections there. So you're not allowed to walk inside, but we got to walk inside and check it out. You can see all the bullet holes are there and everything.
But what I noticed about that, a couple things. Number one, the authority and trust that you had with the guys in the ground, which is the mark of the leader that you want to work for.
The one that's not micromanaging, the one that trusts the guys on the ground. General Pat and said the, what do you say? The, the commander on the ground is always right.
And that seemed to be your attitude all the time.
The trust that you had with the guys on the ground.
And what was phenomenal.
Also as even when that all happened, I remember thinking of myself, man, if that happened in 1994, how much different, do you think it would have been a lot different?
Well, you know, the interesting thing about it, and you're characterized it correctly.
And, and the operators don't even understand this and, or do they need to know this, but I talked about my time working in the White House for two years in the White House.
So when I became a J. Sock commander, I was in a position to be able to understand how decisions were made in the White House and also in the Pentagon.
And I had a great relationship with the Secretary of Defense Bob Gates and Admiral Mike Mullin, who was a chairman and of course, we've done a number of things for the White House at that point in time.
One of the things I used to always do, and I think it infuriated some folks in the White House in the Pentagon, was, I would always say, let me pre-position the guys.
You don't have to make the decision, you don't have to give me the authority to do the assault, but what I don't want to do is for you to give me the authority and then not be in the window to do it.
So let me go and put the guys off the coast of Somalia for whatever we were going to do.
I decided to go go. And finally, of course, somebody said, you do this every time.
And you know that there is this kind of predisposition that if the guys are already out there, why not just let them do it?
I was like, really? I didn't know that.
But that was always a little bit of the game if you were all I played in terms of making sure that I wanted the guys always to be in a position.
That if we got the approval to go, that they weren't, we weren't now having to move and then miss the opportunity because I'd seen it happen before, where we waited and waited.
The decision was hard and finally people would say, okay, we're going to give you permission to go and you go, I'm sorry man.
It's going to take me three days to get there.
And that's what they didn't understand a lot. It's three days by the time, not just the guys from the States, but you got to move ships down.
It ships don't move very fast.
So 99% of the time, I think the White House and the putting out was happy that I pushed them to be in a position, but not always.
But in the case with the Maris Gallaudet, I mean, I get to call from the joint staff that this light boat's been taken.
We got a captain in there and you made it called to do this mission.
Of course, I kept thinking, it's a light boat.
But very quickly, I mean, it happened to be over Easter and it's not that things changed much over Easter, you know.
But I just remember it happened to be that weekend.
But you know, immediately, I know what to do.
I'm going to get on the video with Ebromullin and I'm going to get on the video with the White House and we're going to begin to lay out a plan.
And I'm going to make sure that the guys on the west coast are ready to move, because we got to get boats.
And I'm going to get the fleet moving, interestingly enough for this. My one time that I was proud I was a fleet commander for a couple of days because General Patreyes chopped the change of operational control chopped the fleet assets to me.
Even though I was actually in Afghanistan.
And of course, what people I think have trouble understanding is my situational awareness by the time this is going to my situational awareness in Afghanistan was almost as good in terms of the bigger picture of the guys were on the ground.
I'm looking at it from the close circuit TV that's on board the ship.
We've got a drone overhead. We've got a lot of these assets so you can kind of see what's happening.
Of course, at the end of the day Captain Scott Moore, who was the commander of the seal unit there, he's the guy that's running the show on the ground.
But Scott and I are talking a couple of times a day.
But yeah, you can't be in a position as the three star to be telling, okay, like I want the snipers in these positions.
I don't want the snipers to do that. No, you got to rely on the guys that have been doing this again for years at this point in time.
You know they're going to make the best decision possible.
I was one of the things that always gave me comfort as a commander was I knew the guys would make as good a decision as I would make.
I needed to put them in a position to be successful.
My job was to get them to the point where now they could take action if they needed to.
And then let them figure out how to take the best action whether that was been lottery whether that was the mayor's gallevamo whether it was a thousand other missions.
Hey, you're the commander. I'm not going on the op. I'm not going to be the guy that's in the line of march. I'm not going to be breaching the door.
I want to put you in a position to be successful. I want to make sure you get the right ISR.
I want to make sure you got the right, you know, cap overhead. I want to make sure you got the right artillery. I want to make sure you got the right meta-vac.
I want to make sure we're monitoring a way that's going to make you successful in the end of the day.
Hey, young sergeant, young petty officer, young captain, young lieutenant, whoever you happen to be.
You take the tackle into this and you'll do just fine.
Yeah, you'll screw it up every once in a while. Guess what we all do.
And when that does, we'll take a hard look at why we made the mistake and we'll make the corrections.
And if somebody screwed it up because they really did something bad, we're going to hold you accountable.
But other than that, get out and do the very best you can.
We weren't always successful. We had some some ops that went south on us.
But I wouldn't change anything about the way we had set up the organization to empower the guys, you know, at that level to make the decisions and take the actions.
Yeah, I call that the iterative decision making process. I was one thing that I, as I was in charge of things and some kind of an operation would come up.
Or even if it was like a totally tactical thing of what should we do right now. I would always make really small decisions really quickly.
Yeah. And it made people think I was very decisive because I would make decisions very quickly. They wouldn't recognize how small decisions I've made.
And then I would just adapt and adjust them as needed as we move forward.
But I like the fact that you use the iterative decision making process, taking small steps to actually put some to make it easier for the boss to make a final decision.
Because we're already just all you need to do is pull the trigger the weapons there, the site is on.
We're ready to do this. Just say go and we'll go.
Similar similar one with Salah, Alis, Salah, Nabon, my saying that right?
Salah Nabon, right? Salah Nabon, right?
So you talk about, you know, again, these, there's relationships. And here you had van Housher on the ground.
Who's, who's like the epic seal officer, right? He was a, he was in Vietnam as a Marine.
And, you know, lost his leg due to a parachute accident and it's just a badass.
Nothing stops, but you know, and here you are, you have, so you've got him below you in the chain of command.
When you've got this awesome trust. And then up the chain of command, you've got Mollon and the chairman of the, I mean, Mollon, the admiral Mollon, the chairman of the children,
the chairman of the children, the chief of staff and key trust you. So this is how you, you run this thing is do these relationships.
Yeah, and it went, fortunately, by that time, by the time we went to Salah Nabon.
So Salah Nabon was a guy in Somalia, but he had been responsible for two embassy bombings.
And he was at one point in time. He was like the number one guy in the FBI's top 10 list.
And then after 9, 11 happens, he kind of falls a little lower down the list.
But nobody could find him. And again, a very loose of guy, hiding in Somalia.
And then again, our focus had shifted to Iraq and Afghanistan.
We'll also get this lead on, on Nabon. And, but we didn't know whether or not it was him for certain.
Again, we had an OGA source who said, hey, we think this is him.
And if it is him, he's going to be in a blue sedan. He's going to move up and down the beach.
So back to that process again, it was okay. I'm going to put the guys in a position.
So we moved a couple of small boys, couple of the stores out there, put some little bird helicopters on him,
and set the conditions so that if, in fact, we had a bead on Nabon, then we were in a position to react.
And, and to your point about Pete Van Hoosier. So again, interestingly enough, you talked about the distributed command.
So I'm in Afghanistan. Pete is back in the States. We are both looking at the same feed.
So we had a predator overhead of ISR platform. And now, I had briefed this because there had been a lot of concern in the White House
that they didn't want to put, he loads anywhere in Somalia because of the Black Hawk down incident.
And no matter how much I tried to convince him that really it would be okay, we know how to do this.
We've been doing this a lot. There were still a lot of sensitivity to that. And I understood that.
But we had developed this kind of special bomb at the time that we could drop from a smaller plane, but it was experimental to say the least.
And so I had been given approval to, okay, you can bring the helos in, but only to confirm that you've killed the bad guy,
don't want the helos in until the bomb has been dropped and you've gotten the bad guy and then bring the helos in, get the remains ring back.
Yes, sir, I got it. Well, you know, not always that simple.
So as the sedan starts to move and we believe that to be saw in Abhan, we've got, I mean, so long road,
but there's only a small window of opportunity where that vehicle is not going to be in a crowded area, not a little village or something,
because we did not actually want to hit any civilians. So the plane gets overhead, we're in the window,
but the plane can't get a bead on the weather comes in, nothing's looking right, we can't get the targeting right.
And now I'm losing my target. So Pete Van Hurses on the other end going, sir, come on, you know, we're, we need to send the helos in.
And I'm like, you know, I was really told kind of not to do that.
But now my target is getting away and you know, you're rolled the dice and hope that this is the bad guy that you thought it was.
And so finally I said, okay, Pete, you got it. And you know, the helos went in.
And of course, as soon as the bad guy saw the helos, they opened up on us.
Helos opened up on them. That obviously doesn't go through well form.
There's little bird gun ships, which you're familiar with.
Seals get off. The helos do a quick court on.
I mean, this was right before they were getting to a little village, pull the bodies out and all four of them turned out to be bad guys and selling Abhan was one of them.
And I remember the next day, or maybe the later that day, Abhan will mull and comes on the video.
And yeah, it's very gracious, it goes, well, you know, the open regulations, please pass on my congratulations to Captain Van Hoosier and the guys really good job.
So thanks, sir, and he goes, no William.
And I knew I was in trouble when he called me William.
He says, no William, I recall you briefing the president of the United States.
But you were going to drop a bomb on this guy and there weren't, you know, he loads were going to come in.
Is sir, well, you know, everyone's in a while.
You've got to give the commander a little discretion and the animal kind of smiled and again he said, okay, William, let's get away with this dive.
And all's well, it ends well sort of thing, but the president ever questioned it.
And I think Abhan mulled appreciate the commander's decision.
Yeah, and those, the amount of leadership capital, I mean, sure that one might have cost you a little bit of leadership capital, but the amount of leadership got me.
We just talked about the other off that we took discussed there with Abu Goudilla, you know, 17 minutes.
And how many, as you said, thousands of operations were conducted that, you know, look, we all know some of them go bad inside ways and that's awful, but the, I mean, the batting average of success was overwhelmingly,
but it's actually incredible when you think about it. And so this, this, this, this optempo and this kind of being successful on a regular basis and building that leadership capital and, and kind of, I mean, I guess you, in my opinion, or the way it looks, the final operation that you, you cover in sea stories is, is the first one that I started off with, but which is like I said is I guess it's.
And ten years. Yeah, it's been ten years and, and I mean, if that's not the most famous US special operations mission, I'm not sure what is, but it's Neptune spear.
The Ray that killed bin Laden and.
I mean, you, you, you got to, you know, the perspective that you give.
The intelligence gathered, the preparation, the secrecy, I mean, you got one part where you're talking about, I forget who it is, you're talking about, maybe it's your ex-O or your deputy.
Or maybe you're ops officer, but you, you're not even telling your ops officer. It's complete secrecy about what's going on. The professionalism in every department.
You go through and kind of talk about the decision making process and the discussion to get to these decision points and the conversations and the relationships between you and Admiral Mollon and Secretary Gates and the CIA officials.
And then the president, who's who has to understand and be comfortable with this and the, I mean, this is a tough, this is a freaking hard choice to make.
You know, massive amount of risk and some other much lower risk in terms of US troops and, you know, like to say, oh, yeah, yeah, of all these options. We're going to take the one that puts the US troops in the biggest risk.
Just doing incredible job of of spelling that out in the book.
The pilots, their skills, and then, of course, you know, you got the seals on the ground, the best guys in the world, the best, the best.
What a, what an incredible story.
Well, but there were so many people that had to, you know, make this happen.
And to your point, you know, great trust from, you know, the president on down. But I look back and I'm always great to point out about this and you can certainly appreciate this.
You know, we were, we were honored to be the guys that got been ladden and, and I think what the reason we were honored is because we were representing, you know, the hundreds of thousands of soldiers,
the soldiers, the Arab and the Marines, you know, and thousands that were killed in combat and training for combat that had died as a result of 9.11.
So, yeah, this was, I mean, this was the brass ring for us, but it was also an opportunity to represent everybody that had sacrificed so much from Iraq and Afghanistan.
But on this particular mission, you know, back to my earlier discussion, my job, I knew my job was to put the operators in a position where they were going to be successful.
Unfortunately, on, because we referred to it as the Biggest List, which is a World War II term that says, you know, those people that are authorized to know the intelligence.
So when I was brought into this in late January, it was me.
And of course, the White House is looking for a plan, and now, fortunately, you know, I had been in the teams at 34 years or something at that point in time, and thousands and thousands of missions.
And frankly, I did go back to my, my thesis at the Postgraduate School, I figured, okay, I'll present a shell of a plan to the present.
And, and then we'll take it from there, but the plan was going to be pretty simply.
And you did on a helicopter, we're going to go from point A to point B, we're going to get the bad guy putting back on a helicopter and come home. That's it. I had looked at a lot of other alternatives, you know, could we parachute in.
Could we come in by vehicle, could we, you know, it was there other ways to get to the target.
But every time I looked at that, I kind of came back to my thesis, which was this idea, the point of vulnerability and put point in time.
Where, where you get tripped up. So if we parachute in, you're walking to an LZ and the next thing, you know, there's kids on the LZ, and now you're still 15, 16 kilometers from the target, you're saying, going to make it.
Same thing on, if we come in by vehicles, what happens if, you know, we'd stop to the checkpoint, everything gets busted.
So I decided early on that it was just going to be, you know, he loads from point A to point B.
And that's what I breathed present on. And early on it was just me and I had another captain who was in DC that was kind of covering for me.
But to your point, I couldn't tell anybody, I couldn't tell my command sergeant Major, I couldn't tell my ex. So I mean, it was, that was it.
So my executive officer, that in Colonel Art Sellers, who was just magnificent throughout this, I always say he's kind of the unsung hero.
Early on, I had to tell Art because in my world, I'm a three-star Admiral. And your executive officer is the guy that, I mean, he's kind of like an aide to camp, but more so.
He's a guy that makes sure that every paperwork, peace paperwork comes in, that you've got to take care of you take care of anything's happened that's happening.
The exo is orchestrating all this. And he becomes your kind of closest buddy along with your aide to camp.
So I told Art early on, I said, Art, something's brewing. I don't want you to ask any questions about it. You just need to do what I tell you.
And you know, and we'll be fine. It's like former Ranger. So I got it. And Art kind of helped me through all this.
We'd move from point A to point B and the staff would call up and go, where's the Admiral going?
I would say, you just hear him there. You will worry about where he's going. Now the interesting thing was I had been diagnosed with cancer in 2010.
And so with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. So the staff was always a little reluctant to ask me where I was going.
And when I kept going back and forth to Washington, D.C., they assumed I was going to Bethesda or Walter Reed for treatment.
I didn't, again, I didn't want necessarily play on my cancer diagnosis, but I also didn't want to disabuse him that idea because it gave me a little bit of cover for action.
I could move and the staff would just say he's in Washington. And people would say, what's he doing?
And they would kind of go, we don't know. But they felt comfortable thinking it was kind of part of my cancer treatment.
Finally, you know, the president at one point in time said, well, okay, you're breathing on this. Can we do it?
So it's right. I don't know. Then I got to bring in air planners. I got to bring in the seals. I got to bring in more people before I can really tell you whether or not we can do this.
So the president gave me about three weeks and that's when I brought the guys in to that undisclosed location in North Carolina where you read the excerpt at the beginning.
And it was pretty funny because as you can appreciate, you know, these guys have just come back from an deployment.
I'm often asked, you know, why did you pick the seals over the Delta Force guys?
And they think it was because I was a seal. And it was like, are you kidding me?
You think I would risk this mission based on, you know, some parochial nature of who I thought was going to be wearing a triednernaut.
So there were two commanders I trusted implicitly on the army side and the Navy side. Unfortunately, for the army guys, they had literally just deployed to Afghanistan.
And the seal squadron had just come back. So they were all in leave.
So that provided my kind of cover for action because the team just assumed they were out skiing in Tahoe or doing something.
So I called the squadron commander and I said, okay, and of course beat Van Hoosier, the CO. And we moved them all down to the Sun Disclosed location.
And as you know, we did these kind of sensitive training exercises ever once in a while.
And you can see when I walked into the room, they were like, you know, SOB. You called me off leave with my girlfriend to be, you know, kind of showcase something to the brass.
I fit all the time when the CIA guys said, and we're going after Ben Laden. It was like, as you read, it was like, I did series.
And I actually guys like in each other like, series. And of course after that, it all kind of unfolded. But again, my job was really to not to push it. One of the things I was careful about doing, because as we meet with the president, we have a number of options.
We had a kind of a massive bombing option. Can we take out this thing we called AC one, the Autobot compound one.
There's a big compound. You've probably seen pictures of a kind of trapezoid shape three store building, a couple of other outer buildings.
But that was going to take a massive amount of ordinance to level the place. Did I hear something like 30? Yeah, I hear more than that was 50.
A 2000 pound bombs in order to level the place. And of course, the the CDE, the collateral damage assessment was going to actually hit some of the outer line houses.
And we knew the women and children on the target. So I knew from the get go the president was one. We didn't know it's been lot.
So the president was not going to kill innocent women and children at all. Then we had a second option, which was a more surgical bombing option to get the pay.
As you pointed out, the guy who would come out every day around noon and walk around the compound.
Once again, even with the surgical bombing option, we were probably going to kill a couple of kids and I think the president just I know he that was just not what do you want to do.
And by the way, we weren't going to be sure if we did either one of those bombing options.
How would we know whether it was been lot? The al Qaeda crew to said, wasn't him unless we had visual evidence it was.
And of course, we weren't going to rely on the pack standies because we didn't know whether they had been compromised.
So it didn't take long. I think for the the group, the president's small team to begin to focus in on the raid and and our will mull them was always supportive other aid.
And and Leon Penetta, who was directed to the CIA, was always supportive. Interestingly enough, and I told the story before Secretary Gates did not support the raid.
And he didn't support the raid because he had been in the White House during a desert one when the helicopter crashed.
And at one point time after one of the meetings for the president, every time the president at the end of the meeting would kind of go around the room.
Okay, where are we now and they would say, well, I'm for it. I'm against it and he returned to Secretary Gates and say,
let's present, I don't support the raid. And so after the briefing was over, I came up with Secretary, I said, sir, I worked for you.
If you don't support the raid, you don't want me to do this, just say the word. I mean, you know, this is your call.
And he said something I thought was just, you know, again, fabulous leadership. He said, Bill said, I don't agree with the raid, but we've got to give the president every option available.
And if the raid is an option that I want him to, I want you to do the best you can to plan for it, prepare for it and give him that option.
At the end of the day, the president will make the decision. But just because I don't support it, doesn't mean we're not going to put that option in front of the president.
And again, I thought that was very classy of him and the kind of leader that you would hope to have in that chain of command.
But I remember the second last meeting we had, the president, again, because we were struggling with the term, any weather was been ladden.
He turned a mic lighter who was the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, which had been stood up after 9.11.
And he asked, lighten to kind of read team CIA's intelligence to kind of check their homework.
So the next meeting we were at, which was a couple weeks later, meaning starts in the April.
Me starts off in the president's turn to the latter and he says, well, what is fine?
I could tell lighters were a little uncomfortable. He goes, well, Mr. President, we've reviewed CIA's intelligence.
And we think the chance it has been ladden is anywhere between 60% and 40%.
And when he said 40% I'm thinking, well, I mean this mission's over.
Who in the hell is going to authorize a bunch of seals to fly 162 miles into Pakistan to a compound that is about three miles from their west point.
Three miles from a major infantry battalion, you know, a mile from a police station, and by the way, the Pakistanis have nuclear weapons.
I mean, who would authorize that on a 40% chance that has been ladden?
So I told the president, I said, sir, I, I got to head to Afghanistan. I'm going to command it from there.
If you decide to go, great. I'll have the boys ready to go. If you decide not to go, not a problem.
I got bad guys in Afghanistan, we'll just kind of get back to work. So that was on Wednesday.
I fly out to Afghanistan, got there sometime on Friday.
And I did a call from Leampon out of the director CIA and he says, President's made the decision to go.
That is a gutsy decision. I mean, in light of the fact that we just didn't know it was been ladden.
But this is back to the kind of discussion we've been having all throughout this podcast.
Is the president had seen, I think, over the time that, you know, we've been conducting missions,
that we were mostly successful. He had faith in confidence in us in a way that, you know, every commander would hope that their bosses had confidence in him.
And we hadn't got him all right. I mean, again, when I was a second man,
I read a couple of notable disasters, frankly.
And even at that, the president recognized that, you know, the failures we had were understandable and light of some of the circumstances around it.
And things don't always go perfect.
But he had confidence that we could do this.
And so next day, Saturday, the president calls me and says, he called it really, tell the guys, you know, good luck.
And it was interesting because, you know, man to man, you can tell, you know, even though he's the president of the states, he had this empathy.
You could tell he understood these guys are about to get on this helicopter and fly into Pakistan.
Didn't know whether they would come back because of course we didn't know whether or not was the compound rigged,
because as you saw in a rack quite a few times, you know, these guys would rig the entire compounds.
And so, the president of the state was, uh, been laughing going to be wearing a suicide vest, you know, what were they going to be facing?
And so as the president of the state's, he understood those risks.
And, and I could tell, you know, when he asked me to pass on, you know, his best to the guys, I mean, he seriously meant that he understood the risk they were taken in.
Yeah, as a commander, that means a lot to you.
And I did take the opportunity to pass it on.
But then I remember he said, well, Bill, what do you think?
I said, I'm a president.
I said, well, what's there? We're getting, if not, we'll come home.
The problem with the, if not, will come home scenario, which I had breathed press on.
I said, look, if the seals get on target and somebody comes out with a gun, it is not going to go too well for them.
And as they begin to sweep through the target, which they will, and more people come out with guns, and, you know,
or I can have Afghanistan and Pakistan people have guns, it's not going to go away.
And as they go from the first floor to the second floor to the third floor, look for Ben Laden.
And the guy we thought was Ben Laden turns out to be nothing but a tall pack of standing.
This is going to be a disaster of epic proportions.
I didn't tell the president that, but he understood that because we had talked about the fact that I told them early on.
I told everybody there, if the seals get on target, somebody's going to die.
You just need to understand that right now.
Nobody is going to walk away from this unsteady.
So understand those risks to the president and the other team.
So I understood that.
And again, back to the fact that he had faith in confidence on us.
We kept it secret, we kept it simple.
And then of course, the day of the operations, the guy is executed it exactly as you would hope they would.
You got a story in, I think it's in the hero code.
No, actually it's in sea stories.
It's the story about where you get in trouble, you get kind of caught by your dad.
Well, not caught by your dad, but you get caught.
You, you, you, you, you try to infiltrate a military.
What was it of?
And more, and more stories, and you, you, you, you know, you think your James Bond or whoever.
And you infiltrate, you got a cap gun on your, on your, you know, six-year-old cap gun with you.
And you, you infiltrate a freaking military compound with your buddy.
And then they chase you out of there, they come, they get a dog looking for units.
It's like a serious operation.
And at some point, you drop your pistol, you get back.
And, you know, you get, you get away with it.
Good, where your dad says, hey, your dad, you know, next day or whatever it is, you know,
dad says, hey, there was someone tried to infiltrate.
You know anything about that.
And you lied to him.
Yep.
And it seems like you could tell by the look on his face that he knew that you lied to him.
You suspected you went to bed that night, you pulled down your cover, so to get him bed.
And there's your, there's your gun. So he knew.
You talk a lot about integrity and, you know, tell him the truth.
And I think, you know, when you're, when you're talking about discussing these things up the chain of command,
and it's, you know, I would, you've got to tell the truth about what's happening.
But you develop that kind of trust with your whole chain of command from the Secretary of Defense to the President,
so that when you say something, they actually believe what you're saying.
And that might, that might seem really like a, like a, like a insignificant thing.
But if you think about what's writing on this operation for America, for the world,
if they don't have that like legitimate pure trust in what you're telling them,
I can't imagine, I can't imagine making a decision,
giving the go ahead to someone that I don't deeply and truly trust.
100%
Yeah.
You asked me earlier on about, about my dad.
And I think, you know, we're all kind of products of our experience, and I was, I was fortunate to be raised by two great parents.
But my mom stressed it a lot about, you know, the importance of truth and honesty.
And she expected me to grow up to be a certain type of man.
I mean, there would open doors for, for ladies that would, you know, take care of women and children.
I mean, she had this, this vision of me.
I was going to be a stand-up guy and honest and true and all those sorts of things.
And you, you always want to make your parents proud.
And this particular day and you're right, it was 11 years old.
And we, we tried to get into the same old storage point near LaClaner Air Force Base.
And we got busted and I dropped the cap gun.
And when I, and it was a, they are so later, my dad was the head of operations.
So he was the number three guy at LaClaner Air Force Base.
So the security guys had reported to him that, and then knew some kids.
They didn't know who it was, but they knew some kids had tried to break in.
And, and when my dad confronted me as I said in the book, it's the first and last time I ever lied to my father.
And, and he never, until he died in 2007, he never raised the issue again.
And the reason I thought that was interesting parody news because I carried that burden until until he died in 2007.
But there was another one, I mentioned my time in the Pentagon.
And again, we all to your point, Chuck.
I mean, we all are raised with this idea that it is, of course you're going to be honest.
Yeah, of course you're not going to lie to people.
And you find, you know, that as you go through life, sometimes that's harder to do than it is to say.
But when I was in the Pentagon, I worked for a guy named Captain Ted Grabowski.
And Grabowski, if he had an Americeal, was a little quirky for a seal.
Didn't look like a seal. He was kind of short and stature.
But spectacle had more glasses. He'd been in a glider accident and he had a little bit of a limp and so did not look like your typical seal.
But I found him to be brilliant, hardworking, incredibly insightful, and he knew the Pentagon.
But it was unlike day one or the first week I was there.
At one point in time, we're, we're talking about our budget with the three star animal.
And I thought Grabowski, we had this opportunity.
We were going to get a whole bunch of money for our ammunition and our, and our, and our, our seal delivery vehicles.
And the, the animal question Grabowski and he said, do you really need all of this money?
I mean, can't you take a little slice off the, the ammunition, do you really need that many SDVs?
And I thought Grabowski's going to stand to he's going to say, absolutely I need that.
And much of my surprise is, you know what, animal, you're right.
We can cut our, our ammunition allowance by this.
We can reduce the number of SDVs from 6 to 3, and I thought, what the hell just happened?
Why do you do that?
And afterwards I'm talking to him.
And he says, look, Belly says, I've got one rule when you're here in the Pentagon.
He says, never lie or misrepresent the truth.
Because if you lie or misrepresent the truth, somebody will find out and they will no longer trust you.
And if they don't trust you, you are of no value to me.
And it was a little bit of this kind of philosophical linkage between, it wouldn't just about the moral application of being honest.
There was a practical application as well, which is if you are honest, if you are trustworthy, people will trust you with their money.
They will trust you with their relationships.
They will trust you with their lives.
They will trust you with the big missions.
And it isn't just about saying, well, I'm just not going to lie.
Sometimes people misrepresent the truth.
They embellish things in a way that is to their benefit or in a way that will get them the mission.
I mean, I knew on the Ben Laden raid, there was no way I was going to mislead the president of the United States.
And I hope in my time in the military, I didn't mislead anybody.
At least not willingly and not there, and not intentionally.
So it is important, not just because we know it's important to be honest, but because if you are not honest and you are not trustworthy, you can't build those relationships.
If you can't build the relationships, you can't get the job done.
How many times had you guys, or you seen various units get spun up to go get Ben Laden?
Yeah, a lot of times.
And that was part of it when I first was approached by Admiral Mullin and Afghanistan.
He said, hey, see, I got to lead on Ben Laden.
I mean, I was respectful to Admiral Mullin, of course, but I'm thinking of seeing this picture before.
I mean, we had him in the Hindu Church, we had him in Torabore again.
We'd had him in Pakistan a number of times.
I mean, he was trying to find Waldo.
I mean, it seemed like Ben Laden was ever, I remember one point of time.
He was a little bit of a speed on him up in the Hindu Church.
It was something like, you know, 12, 14,000 feet or something like that.
Up in the middle of nowhere, and somebody said he's hiding in a cave up there.
So because he ought to do with so high, I could only put two guys on the 47.
I put an Air Force SDS guy and one of the guy, and so the helicopter can barely make it up to altitude.
And of course, this is just a wild goose chase.
But they came back and said the young, they was a captain or a major comes to briefing.
And I was like, well, I was obviously at Ben Laden.
But there were footsteps up there in the snow.
And I'm like, really?
He said, out in the middle of nowhere, we followed these footsteps into this kind of little cave.
Very, I'm thinking, really.
Of course, it was not Ben Laden.
It was something.
But it was, so yeah, we had a lot of leads like that.
We had some leads in Pakistan that, I mean, I remember seeing a little careful about this.
But I remember seeing Intel.
And I looked at and said, well, that's him.
There's no question in my mind, but it wasn't him.
Because in fact, he was in that compound in a bottom-odd for probably five years.
And never left that compound.
So yeah, there were a lot of leads out there, but this was the only one in the panda.
What was the timeline from the first time you talked to Admiral Mones that he said he had a lead and execute?
Yeah, so he approached me in December of 2010.
I didn't, I wasn't asked to come back to the states until January or February of 2011.
So in the February timeframe, I spent a lot of time with C.I.
Kind of looking at the Intel.
And then I think I had my first meeting with the president sometime in March,
and then we had a bunch of meetings between March and the end of April.
And so April 30th is somewhere around there, it's one I love for Afghanistan, maybe April 29th.
And then God definitely, Afghanistan, and then we launched two days later.
And how was the timeline for the boys?
From that meeting?
From that meeting when they signed the non-disclosures.
Yeah, so that was probably five weeks, four or five weeks.
So that was, so we spent three weeks, you know, briefing up, doing all the rehearsals.
And then at the end of that three weeks, when I went back and met with the president said we can do this.
Yeah, I think that was towards the end of April.
So I had the General Tony Thomas, who was my number two guy there at J.S.
I had to stay in Washington, and I said, okay, Tony, let's get the guys from the states.
Let's get them moved out there now.
So Tony and Longa P. Van Housier, and of course we had CIA and national security agencies and national security,
especially agency and a whole kind of interagency group that went with us.
But Tony's got to set up in this little talk, tackle operations center there in J.B.
And so when I came out, I mean, it was the guys who said everything was ready to go.
I ended up rolling it about what we were going to launch on Saturday, but there was some fog in the area in the temperature.
It was a little high at the time.
So I rolled it 24 hours and then we pressed forward on Sunday.
Like I said, you got to get the book for the details and all leading up to this.
But there's one little part I wanted to cover.
The missions be actually being executed.
So you're in the in the operation center.
And here we go.
Inside the Joc, I was getting updates from Van Housier and Thompson.
The seals were clearing.
We're still clearing the three story house and the healos were holding their position outside a bottom.
I looked up at the clock 15 minutes had passed since the assault began.
Sir, the squadron commander is on the radio.
Van Housier alerted me.
The voice was unmistakable.
Deep calm in control.
This is Romeo 6-6.
He paused and you could hear a small shutter in his voice.
For God and Country, Geronimo, Geronimo, Geronimo.
The hunt for the most wanted man in the world was over.
We had gotten been ladden.
The Joc erupted in cheers immediately followed by Van Housier's booming voice.
Shut the fuck up, he yelled.
We still have to get these guys home.
The Joc immediately, quieted down.
Van Housier was right.
We still had a long way to go.
I had no sense of relief.
No internal exhilaration.
No feeling of victory.
The mission was not over.
And when I read that, I just thought to myself,
I mean, what a freaking professional Van Housier.
And you could see, I mean, here it is, you know, the ultimate mission,
capturing the ultimate bad guy, or killing the ultimate bad guy.
And everyone's all excited and Van Housier's just on point.
Just no deviation.
It's all for us.
Yeah.
Freaking outstanding.
And it's interesting, too, because you call back and say, yep, we got Geronimo.
We got it done.
And then you realize, wait, is he dead or alive?
Well, I had to report back to Panetta.
Yeah.
I think he'd heard the Geronimo.
And I just said, you know, Geronimo, then I thought,
shit, because, you know, much everybody thinks that this was a kill only mission.
It was not.
We had a plan to capture him if, in fact, to gave up.
And there was clearly not a threat.
And then I realized, I don't know whether he's dead or alive.
So I had to call back down to the squadden commander and say,
Geronimo, E.K.I.A.
Question mark E.K.I.A.
So there was a few second pause.
I think the guys in the White House and they were like,
I thought he had to report it Geronimo as I said, no, he's dead.
So let's make sure we understand it.
I mean, like I said, you go into what happened after that.
It's just an incredible story.
I mean, obviously it's incredible story.
Get the book to check that stuff out.
Before it closes out the book, C. Stories is one, one other little section I wanted to cover.
It's from a chapter called The Greatest, The Next Greatest Generation.
And this takes, this is second takes place in 2007.
We mentioned that you are in Europe for a time.
You're in charge of all special operations forces in Europe and Africa.
But that means you're actually over in Germany most of the time.
And in this part, you're visiting wounded soldiers on their way home
from Iraq and Afghanistan.
So on the way home from Iraq and Afghanistan, oftentimes,
the soldiers, the wounded would stop in Germany at long stool.
And you would go there to visit these wounded guys.
And you talk about one of these cases here.
So you're going into visit.
Going to the book.
The doctor nodded and I pushed the door open and entered.
Lying on the bed completely naked was a young soldier,
not more than 25 years old.
His body was swollen from the impact of the blast.
Burns covered the upper half of his torso and below his waist he had lost half of one leg
and much of the other.
His face was so badly damaged that his eyes were almost sealed shut
and his lips burned clean off.
Life saving tubes extended from just about every orifice in his body
and monitors around the room beaped continuously.
Sir, he can't talk, but he can hear you.
And he likes to engage people. The doctor said,
I slowly walked up beside the bed.
Hey partner, my name's Admiral McCraven.
I could see him acknowledge my presence.
You look like shit.
He managed to smile and reach out his hand toward the nightstand.
The doctor grabbed a clipboard and handed it to the soldier.
He likes to write out his responses.
The doctor said, pulling the attached pen from its holder.
He scribbled on the note pad.
You should see the other guy.
I laughed and he chuckled with me.
Looks like they're taking good care of you.
Is there anything you need?
Once again, he grabbed the clipboard and wrote,
A, beer.
The doctor looked at me and reluctantly shook his head.
Well, tell you what.
When you get back to the states, get well and the beers on me.
He just nodded.
I was struggling with what to say.
I had been in these situations hundreds of times before
and all you could do is make small talk.
Normally, I knew the soldier was unit and I had something more significant to offer.
I walked around to the doctor's side to the bed.
See a marine or a soldier?
I whispered to the doctor.
Sir, I don't know.
I'm just the attending physician.
I can find out for you though.
No, not necessarily.
Not necessary.
Walking back around to my side to the bed,
I leaned over to the young man and asked,
Are you a marine or a soldier?
He seemed agitated by the question.
He pointed to a tattoo that was etched on his thigh.
He must have assumed that the tattoo is fully visible.
But the blast had burned the leg so badly
that only a smudged outline appeared.
I looked closely and could see the image of a big red one,
the first infantry division.
Your soldier, I commented,
he grabbed the clipboard.
Infantry hero.
Infantry.
The toughest occupation in the army, I thought.
The soldiers are always marching,
always carrying a rucksack, always in the line of fire.
You have to be strong and fit to last in any infantry unit,
particularly during war.
As I glance at the young man's battered body,
I wonder if he fully understood the degree of his injuries.
He noticed me assessing his physical condition,
and suddenly a look of defiance came across his swollen face.
He rolled in my direction and then wrote slowly in capital letters,
I will be infantry again.
So that's, you know,
like you said, it's something that you witnessed hundreds of times.
And one thing that you write in the books,
and I've heard you talk about it as well,
is with all these wounded soldiers that you've,
soldiers say, there's airmen and Marines that you've gone and talked to,
every single one of them,
every single one of them has just wanted to get back there,
you know, and get back in the fight.
Yeah, and you've been there, you know, that,
and it is remarkable to me.
And I think of the, to your point,
you know, hundreds of these guys that I've met.
Never once did I hear anybody complain.
I mean, guys at the Lost Arms and Legs and Plass victims,
and they didn't complain.
I just, just amazing to me.
I don't know if I tell the story in that book,
but I've told the story before.
I was so calm commander, I went up to Walter Reed,
and I used to appear out to the same thing
when the guys would get back.
And, um,
I know I had, um,
before you jump into that,
I had one of my guys Ryan Job,
who was shot in the face.
He was blinded.
And I'm talking to him, you know,
he's back.
He's at, I think he's at Bethesda.
And I'm talking to him from Ramadi.
And, you know, he's begging me to come back.
And he says, you know, sir,
I'll get my pig, you know, he's a pig gunner.
He's a 60 gunner.
He goes, sir, give me my pig.
Don't worry, I might not be able to see him,
but I can smell him.
I'll get him.
And, you know, there's just the attitude
and same thing with the first guy
that I had that got badly wounded.
Guy named Cowie.
Cowie.
And Cowie was, you know,
we know if he's going to keep his leg,
but he was shot up bad.
He's on morphine or whatever he's on.
And we, we'd have been in Ramadi
for a very short period of time at this point.
And I get to the, to the, to the,
Charlie Med,
the field medical area.
And I roll in there.
And he's, you know, he, he holds out his hand.
And, and I grab his hand.
And he like pulls me in close.
And he just whispers, he's, you know,
sir, let me stay.
I'll sweep up just please let me stay.
Don't send me home.
And, and you know, here's a guy.
That's a freaking incredible athlete, incredible guy.
And we don't know if he's going to keep his leg.
And the only thing he cares about is, you know,
can I stay?
Right.
Yeah, and this, again,
it seemed like it was a course of this assault guy.
I just saw it again and again with all the guys that we encounter.
But this one particular visit I had up to Walter Reed.
I'd come up see some of our kind of soft guys
Rangers and, and others who'd been wounded and
and of course Walter Reed was where we sent the
frankly the most seriously injured certainly the
blast victims and the, and the amputees.
The burn victims generally went to down the Fort Sam.
But I'm up there visiting a couple of guys and talking to them
and they're wives and everything.
And you know, you know how to talk to these guy.
I mean, there, there guys that that are our
Rangers or Delta operators or our seals and,
and that particular day,
there were three or four of them there.
And then afterwards the sergeant major is escorting
the rounds to say, sir, there's somebody else like you to meet.
He's not a soft guy.
He's with a 25th Infantry Division.
And he was in Iraq and a vehicle vehicle got hit by an
explosive form of check dial.
He is a quadruple amputee.
And I said, absolutely, I'd love to go meeting.
So I go up to the, to the second floor of the rehab center there.
I see the young man standing off the side and he's kind of
leaning up against the rail.
And of course he's only about yay big because he's got in
a legs. And so I come over to talk to him and I kneel down so I can kind of
get eye to eye with him and I just, I know what to say.
I mean, what do you tell a young kid who's lost both his legs,
all of one arm and most of the other arm?
And so as I'm trying to make some small talk,
I mean, you obviously saw some in my eyes, you know,
the pity or a morse or something.
And Terrence me says, sir, I'm 24 years old.
I'm going to be just fine.
I never forgot that.
I'm 24 years old.
I'm going to be just fine.
And all he want to do was,
does unit was still in a rack.
And he said, can you get me back to Hawaii so I can be there
when the 25th anniversary division comes back?
So I think we can manage that.
And we did.
And he was able to get there and meet his unit.
And I came back.
Well, outstanding.
And that's, you know, again, a lot of the book is obviously
focuses around special operations and as you point out,
and as we both know, the sacrifices made by the entirety of the US military
is just, it's incredible.
It's incredible in the bravery.
The bravery doesn't stay in one unit.
It's in all these units and incredible to see.
You end up as the bull frog in the seal teams.
Which is, which means that you, at whatever many,
maybe you had it for a year or two, I'm not sure.
But that means you had more time in the seal teams than anybody else in the
seal teams at that time on active duty.
Right.
How long did you, how long are you the bull frog for?
So, both are for three years.
So I, I shared, so I, I was made the bull frog at 34 years
into the teams.
And I shared it with the guy named Brian Sebenahler, who was probably a captain of the
time, but Brian and I had gone through training together.
So, and Brian was young and listed the trooper when we went through training.
And of course, you went, I think you made senior chief in the Matocio.
And has a long career as an officer.
Absolutely fabulous officer, great friend.
I hope to run into him while I'm here.
So Brian and I, because we've been in the same class,
we, we shared the, the bull frog for a couple years and Brian retired.
And I, I think I ended up flying solo for about the last year of my time as the
Socom commander, but you have the last three years.
Yeah, I mean, part of this was just long and Jevety.
You know, you just, you keep swinging away.
And yeah, 37 years, but it goes by fast.
And I was, I had a chance to talk to one of the,
the seal classes yesterday.
And I said, let me, let me tell you a little story.
I said, you know, when I retired in 2014,
and I, I had a chance to be the Chancellor of the University of Texas system.
So, 230,000 kids, 100,000 employees.
Great great opportunity.
But I would meet these, you know, these, these very successful captains of industry that
were billionaires.
You know, never where you went.
And they were, they were great.
They were actually very, very good people.
I really enjoyed the folks that I had a chance to meet.
But they were all invious of me.
And all the money in the world could not get them the opportunity to lock out of a submarine
or fast-rope out of a helo or, you know, jump out of a plane from 30,000 feet at night
on 02.
And as successful as they had been, they didn't have the experiences.
They didn't have 37 years of being in a locker room,
being with the guys, getting harassed every day in a good natured manner.
And, and being with guys, we're sacrificing to their families,
it we're sacrificing.
They didn't have that experience.
So I told these young students going through buzz.
I said, guys, let me tell you something.
You still got there in second phase.
So I still got a long ways to go.
I said, you're going to have those days still left in training,
or you're going to want to quit.
Don't do it.
Don't do it because once you've penned that tried and on,
your life changes forever.
And you'll have hard days in the teams.
I mean, you're absolutely going to have hard days.
And I said, I was fired.
I had missions that didn't go well.
But when you look back over your time in the teams,
whether you spent four years or 40 years,
you'll never regret a moment of it.
Because you're going to have friends and stories and adventures
that your, you know, your friends from high school and college,
and we'll never have had.
And when you're old and gray like I am and you're sitting in your rock
and chair and you're be able to look back on that and say,
you know what?
That was pretty good run.
I wouldn't try to for anything.
The person that you shared the,
the Beau Frog with.
Yep.
Yeah.
He was my, he was my Ptunkman.
There you go.
Yeah.
You mentioned, you know, earlier today we were talking.
And you mentioned something else about the tried it.
And who owns that tried it.
Yeah.
Same thing talking to the, the guys going through training.
I said, look, you know, if you get your tried it,
you need to understand it's not your tried it's not Joe's tried it's not Jon's tried it.
It's, it's, it's all of our tried it's you represent everybody that
ever wore a tried and everybody that's ever going to wear a tried and so you have a responsibility
as a member of this community to wear that tried and with honor with dignity every single day.
And I, I also told him another story about you,
you mentioned the parachute accident.
And after my parachute accident about a year and a half afterwards,
I'm still in the White House and I go down to the Naval Special War for group two.
And the Commodore was having a commander's conference.
So all the officers had kind of assembled there.
And I'm still, I'm barely walking well by now,
but you know, we're going to do a team guys do.
We're going to have a PT in the morning.
We're going to attend mile run.
So we kind of break out the PT circle and of course,
it's push up, sit up, sit up, sit all that sort of stuff.
And I'm struggling to get through the basics because I've got my abs or not back.
The pelvis is still hurting.
But I've fake my way through the PT.
Now we're going to go for the run.
And I think we went out to,
we went out to the main point of the Salt Point State Point nut.
At some point that whatever the State Point nut.
But we're going to do two five mile loops or something like that.
So we start off with the run and I hang for all about 100 yards.
And then everybody just leaves me.
So but hey, I'm going to do what I can't.
So I'm kind of walking jogging trying to finish the run.
Well, few months later, the guy this lead runner,
you know, he comes around on the first loop of the two mile run.
And he sees me.
And of course, at this time, I'm a Navy captain.
But then for 20, some odd years and he kind of pulls up the side me.
And he says, so what are you doing?
I said, what do you mean?
You go, what are you doing?
I mean, you're coming off a bad parachute accident.
He said, you got nothing left to prove.
And I remember, I thought about that for a long time.
And he was absolutely wrong.
And I told these young guys, I said,
every single day that you wake up and you wear that try and you've got something to prove.
And if the time comes, that you think you're too senior or too entitled,
or that you've done it long enough that you don't have anything left to prove,
you're the wrong guy for the job and you need to leave.
Because I don't care whether you're an instant or a semen or a forestar animal.
Every single day you wake up, you got something to prove.
And if you don't take that attitude, then you're probably not the right person for the job.
Something I wanted to ask you about because you mentioned it real quick.
You were talking about, hey, we had a lot of success in we sat here and you and I and I had talking about how great we had been.
And the special operations community and I talked about,
I talked about this incredible batting average, right?
And all that.
And then you were saying, things always didn't go well.
When things went bad, you know?
I've had things go horribly, horribly wrong.
And, you know, it's one of those things that really stings.
What do you have any advice or any stories where you remember where something went wrong?
And you had to own it.
Yeah, unfortunately, probably way too many stories.
But the one consistent part of when things go wrong is you got to own it.
I mean, you have to. You're the person responsible.
And what you don't want to do is you don't want to say, well, look, I know I'm in charge,
but it was really the, you know, the young captain of the major or the seal Lieutenant Commander.
I mean, it's real, no, no, I'm sorry.
You're the guy in charge.
You're responsible.
Now, that doesn't mean you got to get fired every time,
but that means that you have got to take ownership of the problem.
You've got to figure out how to make sure that problem doesn't happen again.
You have to hold the people accountable if the mistakes they made were,
were mistakes of laziness or of not being moral legal and ethical,
then you have to hold them accountable.
And even when they did everything right and they screw up,
you still have to hold them accountable.
Doesn't mean you have to fire them, but you have to hold them accountable,
so that everybody understands, look, we got to standard.
This is the standard we have to maintain.
And if you don't live up to the standard, you are going to be held accountable
because lives are at risk.
But the first person you have to hold accountable is yourself.
And so, you know, most of the time, certainly over in combat,
when things would go wrong, I had to go see the forestar and say,
this is on me because, you know, and again, this gets back to the Navy mentality,
as you all know.
I mean, in the Navy, because the Navy has always had this kind of
shipboard mentality and for your listeners, you know, when you are the
commanding officer of a ship, you are responsible for everything that
happens on that ship.
And when you pull away from the pier, the commanding officer is king.
I mean, he is risky or she now is responsible for everything that happens.
And the Navy understands that look, if you are the commanding officer,
and your ship runs a ground, and you were asleep in your
state room, and the young junior officer who was on the helm,
or was the officer of the deck, failed to wake you up, even though you had
told them to wake you up, I'm sorry, that's still on you.
Because you created an atmosphere of fear or something where that
junior officer didn't feel like he had the latitude to wake you up
in the middle of a crisis.
So, you see it happen a lot, and people say, well, why would you hold
the commanding officer responsible when he left orders for that
junior officer to wake him up before things got bad?
And the point of the Navy is this idea, this tradition in the Navy,
that the commanding officer is responsible because then you didn't train them
well, then you didn't create the culture for them to do the right thing.
Something was wrong when you were the commanding officer.
So, frankly, throughout my time in the Navy, and certainly in the
special operations community, at the end of the day, it's about me.
Now, you know, fortunately, you know, your bosses know that when things
go south, your job is also to correct the problem.
Sometimes the problem is with you.
I mean, I think back on a hostage rescue that we had,
and I'm always careful about telling the story,
but we had a hostage rescue that did not go well.
And the hostage ended up getting killed.
And unfortunately, the guys didn't tell me the truth about the situation.
But I also looked back on this and realized that some of this was on me.
Because at the time, as I mentioned, I was kind of bouncing back and forth
between the Racken FNS stand, and this mission had come up.
And normally in a hostage rescue situation, I mean, we treated, you know,
like it is a no kidding national mission, and we are going to do everything
possible.
But because we were running so many missions, sometimes in FNS stand,
it's not that the guys didn't take it seriously,
but we probably didn't follow all the steps that we normally would have taken
if this had been a national mission.
And I think some of that played into why we didn't do the detail planning that would have helped.
Again, would it have changed the outcome?
I don't know.
But I remember thinking afterwards, yeah, the guys in the ground kind of failed
to do what they probably should have done, and we held them accountable.
I personally held them accountable.
But I also kind of had to look myself in the mirror and say, hey, you know,
at the end of the day, maybe you should have provided better oversight
and ask harder questions rather than deferring to somebody else to do it.
So, but here's one other thing I would offer to you.
Yeah, you're going to make mistakes.
And the one thing I tell folks that are learning to be leaders is particularly
in combat, you're going to make mistakes, but you've got to be ready to make the next
tough decision.
Because if you were afraid to make the next tough decision,
when the last mission went bad, then you're not the leader we need you to be.
Particularly in combat.
Again, every once in a while I would have a mission that would go south,
and I knew we could have done things better.
And I realize now the next mission comes along and you say,
I don't know, should I do this?
I do this?
And if you start to doubt yourself, if you start to question too much,
if you're afraid to make the tough decisions, then you're putting guys lives at greater risk.
So, again, you got to learn from those mistakes, you got to do the best you can,
but as the leader, you got to be prepared to make the next tough decision.
And if you're not, for fear of failing again, it's time to move on.
And I always found that when things went south,
invariably another opportunity would tickly in combat.
Another opportunity is not far around the corner.
Okay, now let's put our A game on and you talk about when you're fired.
Same thing, when a mission goes south,
and now you know, have another opportunity, and you're doubled down on everything.
You want to make sure you're doing everything you can to be successful
and get beyond that bad mission.
And that's how people progress.
But yeah, yeah, unfortunately, too many times,
the things didn't go well.
But I'd like to think that the ledger shows we had more successes than we had there.
But I do remember one time on a particular target in a country,
not a rack in Afghanistan, that I need a permission to take a strike.
The intelligence said, hey, I had a matter of minutes before the bad guy moved off target.
So, that's the engineering aims, I get to the forestar,
and I said, I need permission from the president to take this strike.
In two minutes, I get permission back from President Obama to take this strike.
So I take this strike, and it's not the right guy.
Now, the good news is it was a bad guy.
The bad news is it was not the guy I thought it was.
And so now, the White House comes back and says, hey,
you know, the president made this decision,
and it didn't pan out the way you'd hope.
I got it, it was a bad guy, but you know, we were,
you were getting the president's permission because you said it with this guy.
So I said, yeah, may I help him?
And let me explain to you how I came to that decision, and a long story between you
certain hand held radios don't have the same fidelity, et cetera, et cetera.
But it forced me to go back and say, okay, I just put the chain of command in a difficult,
they trusted me, and I let him down.
I let him down because maybe I rushed it too much, trying to get a win,
and you have to go back and reassess.
But the last thing you want to do is put your boss in a situation where they trusted you
and you let him down.
I mean, I had one mission that went south, and I remember my boss,
yeah, you don't mind getting wire brushed.
Yeah, when you're, so wire brushed me, yeah, when somebody calls you up and just rips you apart,
you know, I got used to that.
I mean, combat that happens.
But I remember one point in time, I had a mission to kind of go south and the,
and the, and the forestar, when I had him on the phone, I was just playing things you got as Bill.
I am really disappointed in you and your men and man.
Yeah, that's a knife and the hearts sort of thing.
And he had a right to be.
But we're cleaning that, got back to business, and then I remember a couple years later,
you know, I were having lunch, and he said, do you remember that incident?
Oh, yes, sir.
I do remember that incident.
You know, as you covered really, you recovered very well, and you did a great job,
and then again, that's, that's what you watch your bosses to say,
that they appreciate the work you do.
Well, and the bull frog for three years, and, and in, what was it?
You actually did the commencement speech at the University of Texas before you retired.
I did.
Yeah.
I was about to say, you're a shining example of the, of the fact that the zero defect attitude is wrong,
right? You know, you have that zero defect attitude of, hey, if someone fails one time,
get rid of them or if someone makes a mistake or if they're not perfect, get rid of them.
We've all do respect, sir.
You are an outstanding example of, you know, someone that's someone that's, you know,
but I don't want to say you had plenty of defects along the way.
But I fear mistakes, but there certainly are, I mean, just so people understand,
you know, when you get fired from a position as a naval officer, that can be,
that, that oftentimes the end of your career.
Right.
So you can get you going on for a couple more years, but that can be the end of your career.
Yeah.
I mean, I was blessed with it in great people who gave me a second chance.
And, you know, I said earlier, I think, you know,
once a while, we all need second chances.
And again, I was fortunate in my career a number of times.
I remember we had one particular mission where I went across the border into Pakistan.
And it was my first mission actually as a J. Sacramento.
And without going to the two-by-step detail, bad guys,
we've been looking at this target for a long time.
And my first mission as the commander.
And I, I mean, I've rolled the dice.
I've always been a bit of a risk taker.
So we wanted to go get this target.
So we go in and the guys kind of get compromised.
Just as they're coming onto the target, gun battle ensues.
Bad guys get killed, but we wanted to capture them because we knew they had intel.
And anyway, the mission does not go well.
So I come back and, so now I've got a report back to my boss who was General Marty Dimsey,
who was a sent-com commander at the time.
So I called him up and I said, he's here's what happened.
And obviously I'm not too happy about a counter-math through.
And he says, okay, Bill, okay, fine.
So hang on, hang on with phone.
Few months later, phone rings.
His general Dimsey on the phone. He says, hey, Bill, you sounded a little down.
So, yes, sir.
So, you know, the mission didn't go as planned.
He goes, it's okay, man.
I mean, missions are not always going to go as planned.
And you know, you made all the right decisions,
but as we all know, the enemy gets a vote sometimes.
He said, don't, don't let this shake you.
You just keep doing what you're doing.
I tell you that. My first mission is the J. Sacramento.
And when the sent-com commander has your back,
like General Dimsey did, I mean, that's when you,
except you need people up the chain of command that
believe in you even when things don't go well.
And I always hope that when I was in command,
and officers below me struggled sometimes,
I would take the officers analyst that I'd take the time to go down and say,
it's okay, you know, things don't always go well.
Get back up on the horse and let's keep moving.
If you got confidence in these guys,
now again, there's some guys you just got to say,
you know what, you weren't meant to be in this position.
And I had, you got, I had to fire a few people too.
And some of them, you know, as good as they might have been in training,
when it came time for combat,
it just wasn't, they weren't right for it.
And then you had to move them on as graciously as you could
if they, if they weren't the right guy for the job.
But again, I was blessed throughout my career to have people
that had confidence in me and continue to give me second chances
and put me in position to be successful.
Early on in my last deployment to Ramadi,
I had a blue arm blue, I had a fractur side take place
and, you know, it's a freaking complete nut or nightmare.
And from the Iraqi soldier got killed, one of my guys got wounded
several other friendly Iraqis got wounded.
And the army, the army working in Ramadi,
was kind of like, hey, you know, like, it happens almost.
But that's not a very special operation's attitude, you know,
at all.
Van Hoesier happened to be coming through country at the time.
And he happened to stop by shark base at the time,
which was my little basin.
And, you know, he was a marine Vietnam man.
And he said, hey, Jocca, I wasn't way city.
And he goes, and I wasn't, he goes, I didn't fight in way city,
but I was there afterwards.
And it's urban combat, and this shit is hard.
And I forget the percentage, but it was a mass of third of the casualties
in way city, we're friendly fire.
You know, it's going to happen, square you shit away,
fix your chicken and you move on.
And that was to me, okay, okay, this is,
I'm not the worst loser in the world,
which I absolutely felt like, it's freaking horrible.
And then, you know, a few months later,
Mark Lee is a first seal killed in Iraq.
And, you know, I'm again, just heartbroken and crushed.
And Admiral Mowire, who I, you know,
was his aide for 13 months and called me up, you know,
and said, hey, you got to get back out there.
You're doing the right thing.
And that kind of support from these senior leaders at that time.
You know, it's a very similar situation for me.
But, you know, it's real easy to real easy to pile on, right?
To say, oh, you had a blue on blue,
what the hell's wrong with you?
Real easy to do that.
It's really so you lost a guy.
What are you guys doing?
Real easy to take that approach and both those guys, you know,
just took the approach of actually understanding what we were going through.
Hey, man, there's, we're, we're getting in firefight.
Every single day here, you think we're going to make it through a six month appointment
and not taking the casualties like that's,
I don't even know, I don't even know why I would think that.
Like, it's a crazy thought.
But another good leadership lesson and it's just, you know,
hey, people are going to have things happen.
People are going to make mistakes.
Things are going to go wrong.
What are you going to do?
You're going to pile on, especially somebody that's already
freaking tearing themselves up.
You're going to pile on and I had to do the same thing, you know,
with, with platoon commanders, you know,
late babinem, and he's, he's calling me up.
You know, it's another, he's calling me up.
Hey, we just, you know, guy got shot, Ryan Job shot.
He's hit bad.
I don't know if he's going to live.
The army's in a gunfight right now, Jocco.
We need to go help him.
And I'm like execute, you know, don't,
didn't run it up the chain.
The armies were side by side with these guys and he ends up losing Mark.
You know, it's like, are we going to pile on these guys?
Are we going to support, they're making a freaking hard decision
to make an at best possible decision they can make at the time?
And that's what we have to do.
Yeah.
And your point about decision making is a good one because the nature of combat in and to some degree
of the nature even prior to combat and training, you see it, but more so in combat because to your point,
you're having to make hard decisions all day long.
You're just not going to get all those decisions right.
When I, when I became the chancellor of the University of Texas system,
I'm in charge of 14 institutions, very large institution,
university tech, it's at Austin,
I'm the Anderson Cancer Clinic.
And I've often said, you know, in the states today,
some of the hardest jobs in the world are being the presence of institutions like that
because they've got students, they've got faculty, they've got donors, they've got, you know, all these sorts of things.
But everyone's in a while there were people outside the system that,
well why did the president make that decision?
Why would he do something like that? Why would she do that?
And I have to say, you know, they make a thousand decisions a day.
999 of them, you don't see because they were good decisions.
And now you're going to get on them because they made one bad decision.
I got this. You, you, you, thank you very much for your input,
but you know, and I would tell the president,
look, I've got it. I haven't been the president of the University before,
but I've been in charge of things. It's okay.
Do the best you can. You're going to make mistakes.
I got you back. And, but, you know, if you make serious mistake,
you're going to hold your countable. Yeah. And if you, if you're a repeat offender,
that means you're probably not capable of doing the job.
And so I'm going to fire you and that's the way it works.
So you, you end up retiring after 37 years.
I guess there was no really else for you to go.
I mean, the career worked out okay.
And, and then you, you'd given that commencement speech,
which is, I guess this,
I have to check with echo Charles, my kind of,
what is it, pop culture guy?
Yes.
Was it safe to say that's a viral speech?
Fire, okay.
So maybe even iconic.
Oh, iconic.
You give the iconic make your bed speech.
Did you know you, what point did you figure out you're going to be the Chancellor there?
Yeah. So they had approached me in April about the job.
And, and frankly, initially, I set a what, and interested.
I mean, I was coming off, you know, 37 years.
I was really kind of ready for a break.
And, and I knew being the Chancellor was another, you know, stepping into a, you know,
365 to a year or sort of job.
But, I mean, my wife and I would talk about it.
And she said, okay, look, if you could do anything else,
because I got asked to be CEOs of this, and then,
as if you could do anything else.
What would you rather do when I thought,
yeah, I don't know.
This actually sounds like pretty good yet.
So I'm, I've got to have a, you know, I've got to have great students that kind of like my troops.
I'm going to have football team and a baseball team,
and I'll get the travel around.
I mean, it was essentially the same sort of leadership dynamics of being the so-comment of the J.
Jay Saw Commander.
I mean, again, you had faculty and students and issues you had to deal with,
and I had subordinate commanders.
And so it turned out to be a great job.
But that was an April.
And then I give the speech in May.
But it wasn't until, so the speech to your point.
I mean, it, it, it gets a lot of traction.
And then, and it was about June, I decided, you know, I think this is going to be a good,
good job for me.
So we agreed to do it.
And I think sometimes in July, they kind of anointed me and then I took over in January.
You, you like brushed over the fact earlier that you got diagnosed with cancer,
you know, and, and in the book, you talk about kind of what that,
or one of the books you talk about, what that experience was like.
And, and it seemed like it's, it was something that you could kind of suppress for a while.
But it ended up, when in 2017 kind of catching up with you a bit.
Yeah, Dad.
So chronic lymphocetic leukemia, I mean, the good news is it's a chronic cancer.
So it is manageable to a degree.
But, you know, for years prior to 2010, every time I get a physical,
the doctors would say, well, you know, you're anemic.
Now, let's say, I'm sorry about that.
And yeah, I got a job, do what I do.
And I say, well, take, eat more protein, take the Zyron tablets or something.
And then in 2010, Dr. Diagnosed, they did a bone marrow biopsie,
and they came back to all the IIT CLL.
And I, but I remember the doctors were more concerned about the neemia.
They said, how do you get up in the morning?
I know, I get up, I drank a couple of rippets, you know,
I energy drinks, I got a work, and because what was happening
was my body was storing the iron in the bone marrow,
but it wasn't moving the iron.
So long runs, you know, you just weren't getting the oxygen into the system.
But, I'm sorry, you got a job to do, you know, you get up and do.
And so, and then when I became chancellor, I could tell that it was,
it was starting to get more problematic.
I was just finding days, I had trouble getting up off the couch, you know.
And, but again, you had a job to do.
So you get up and you go do it, you power through it.
Finally, in 2017, it just kind of perfect storm.
I'd had a little bit of a virus.
The anemia was at its peak.
And my doctor who had diagnosed me in 2010, great guy named Michael Keating,
who really kind of, I talk about it in the hero code.
You know, you go in there, you're scared, you know, thinking that, you know,
my career is over, maybe my life's over, and then not through this in future
and he said, hey, don't you worry about it.
We got this, you're going to be fine.
And of course, first question I asked is, can I go back to Afghanistan?
My wife was like, really? That's your first question.
But so, you know, I was able to kind of continue on, but finally in 2017, it caught up.
I got some therapy at MD Anderson.
Like, pop me full of chemicals.
And I mean, a month later, all my numbers were good, and I've been, you know,
not going wood, been feeling good, so ever since then.
When do you retire from the chancellor job?
In 2018, summer of 2018.
And when did C-Stories come out?
All right, I'll check.
Yeah, but I'll check.
That's sure.
Twenty-nine.
Twenty-nine, maybe.
So, also, it's after your tired.
After your tired.
Yeah, okay.
That's a good one.
So, make your bed was the first one, and that was, I think, when I was still the chancellor.
Yeah, C-Stories was maybe 2019, and then, the hero code just came out.
And so, hero code, the latest one, before we close out,
what brought about the hero code?
You know, I think it really kind of came back to make your bed.
I mean, I'm always just like hero, I joke.
You know, people are always asking me, you know, kind of give us more lessons.
That sort of thing.
But people were asking me, okay, tell me who your heroes are.
And the hero code, it's not about me.
I mean, it's through my eyes, but it's about people that I met or encountered along the way.
And it is about the qualities that they had.
And I actually, when I first started that, I thought, you know, what is a hero?
I mean, we kind of intuitively know what a hero is, but I pulled up the textbook definition.
And it was actually pretty good.
The textbook definition says a hero is someone we admire for their noble qualities.
And I like this idea of their noble qualities.
They're in their perfect, but they have noble qualities, certainly at a point in time when they need them.
So the first story is about courage. And Winston Churchill said something like, you know, courage is the most important of all qualities because it guarantees all the rest.
So, you know, you're not going to have anything else unless you first have courage.
And the first story is about actually why he was, unfortunately, killed in Afghanistan and her remarkable courage.
But I go through the book with these, these stories of these people that I think had the right qualities, the courage and humility and sacrifice and perseverance and the sense of duty.
And you read a little bit on the sense of humor.
I mean, frankly, and I tell the story about being at UDT-11, but of course, I saw that sense of humor in the hospitals.
And this is when it really resonated with me. Back to the, the infantryman who said, you know, you should have seen the other guy.
I mean, how many times did I give some guy, you know, good nature of banning you said, man, you look like shit.
That was always the standard comeback. You should see the other guy.
And of course, that was their way of saying, hey, I may have lost an armor leg, but they haven't beaten me. I can still laugh about this.
And so, you know, and then the last one is on forgiveness. And you talk about, you know, what missions went south? Well, this was when they went really south on us.
And it was a, we were going after a bad guy in Gardez.
Had some soldiers on target. We thought the bad guy was in the compound.
Guys got up on the walls, snipers looking down in. Somebody comes out with an AK-47. He gets shot.
Another guy in a doorway picks up an AK-47. The, the soldier automatic weapon shoots him, but in shooting him rounds go through him.
And unbuttoned, it's killed a number of women on the other side.
And so, when the action dies down, they get on target. They can't figure out why the, the women by the time we get in there, they are bound.
And, and so, frankly, initially, we thought maybe it was on her killing. But of course, we didn't, it sounds crazy, but we just didn't understand the time that, you know, they bound him up so that they, the jaws didn't open and other things.
And so, it took us a while to really understand what was going on. But then what we realized is we did the investigation was,
a, one, the two guys with the AK-47 turned out to be FNM policeman.
And the women were in a sit-by standards that we had unfortunately killed. I mean, it was the, it was the war of all my time.
And it was the worst, you know, kind of civilian casualty incident that I'd seen. And we'd had some bad ones, but none quite as bad as that.
And I realized, yeah, during the day, I mean, it's back on me.
So, I went down to apologize to the father. And I remember, I linked up with some Afghan soldiers and one of their army guy.
And we went into the town in Guard Dess, and of course, there are hundreds of angry Afghans.
But you got an obligation. And so I sat down in this city hall for like a better term, was about 200 Afghans seated there.
And I apologize to the father. And I remember before I did it, I talked to my Afghan counterpart, General Salim.
And I said, what do I say to this guy? I mean, we killed his sons and a daughter. What do you say to a guy like that?
And Salim looked at me and he kind of cocked a setting, he said, oh, he will forgive you.
I said, so I don't know. He goes, oh, no, he will forgive you.
I said, well, with all the respect, Salim, and he said, he's a good Muslim. He will forgive you.
And he said, look, he said, think about forgiveness is it not only relieves your burden.
It will relieve his burden as well. It will take away his anger.
And it will, if he forgives you. And I thought, man, that's a stretch.
But I got there and sat down with the father and I apologize to him.
And I can see the look in his eye and they forgave me.
And this idea forgives particularly today. You know, it seems like everybody today gets easily offended.
You know, everybody gets slided and they want to hold on to that anger.
They don't want to forgive people for whatever that slight was because the anger empowers them to be mad.
It empowers them to fight back.
And they feel like if they let that anger go, if they forgive that individual,
then they don't get to be the person that holds the power.
And I think that's just absolutely the wrong way to approach it.
I mean, the whole thing about forgiveness.
So I tell the story about there about the white supremac still in roof that killed all the people at the Baptist Church.
And the families went up one by one and said, I forgive you.
I forgive you.
And the point was they were not going to, they were not going to hold on to that anger.
They were not going to kind of bear that burden.
So today as we look at society and we wonder why everybody gets so offended.
I mean, I would offer take the opportunity to try to forgive the people that offend you.
I mean, some of them are bigger fences, some of them are little ones.
But I think as a society, we can do a little better than every single slide, every single, you know,
misstep somebody takes, you don't have to hold on to that anger.
You don't have to fight back. You can forgive people.
Well, it takes a lot more strength to forgive someone than it does to hold a grudge.
It absolutely does.
I often worry to worry because, you know, sometimes we have whole sections of society or countries or people that that have a grudge.
And you know, I look at it as two parts.
Like you need one side needs to say, I'm sorry, the other side needs to forgive.
And it's very difficult to get to human beings, just just two human beings to do that.
And when you have, you know, a collective lot of grievances from two different opposing sides,
we have a hard time making that progress.
That's the latest book, the hero code.
And as you and I were talking as we, as we start off, I've written these kids books and the kids books
have a code, the warrior kid code. And I mean, it's just the similarities are awesome.
It's awesome to see, you know, you didn't read this, but you know,
you know, what's it talks about, humility and staying calm and treating people with respect and trying to help and protect people.
And it's just these are the things that that we need to do.
And yeah, I appreciate the fact that you, you've, you've, this, this latest book out to,
to give people a little guidance, a little something to strive for.
With that, it's only been about four hours.
Um, echo, you got anything?
I don't, I think we covered it.
He's usually throws a curve ball question at the end, so you're getting off easy.
Anything else before we close out?
Yeah.
I want to thank you, Jaco.
You know, you have represented the community with such dignity, such honor.
I love what you're doing. I love what you're doing with the podcast.
I love what you're doing with your life.
I love how you are engaging with the community around you.
You know, it is important for us, particularly at this time.
You know, the, the community has had its ups and downs.
We're, we're in a little bit of a trot now, but we need great folks like you to continue to be the sort of
representatives that people can look up to.
And so, frankly, I want to take time to thank you for the great work you've done.
The great example you have set for, you know, not just the new young kids that are going to be
Seal someday, but frankly for everybody you come in contact with.
That's, that's incredibly valuable nowadays.
To thanks.
I certainly appreciate that.
I can, I can guarantee you that there's, there's,
there's the only reason I'm here is because what the community gave to me and the people that I was able to follow and emulate.
And it's just, it's an honor to be sitting here talking to you.
And thanks for coming on today.
I know my pleasure.
And, and more important.
Thank you for your service to, to the Navy, to special operations.
And first and foremost, who are, to our great nation.
And then someone selfishly.
Thank you for what you did to the, for the teams.
Thank you for leading me and, and my fellow frogmen and, and for setting an example.
That will forever guide our conduct, our character and our ethos.
There was my honor, thanks.
And with that Admiral McCraven has left the building.
So, echo.
Yes.
You had no questions, which is kind of surprising.
It was crazy.
Did you start connecting the dots on who is in the room?
Yeah.
More sudden, things are already new.
And, well, one of the depends on what you mean, but new.
Right.
But, yeah, I knew and I heard, and, you know, I am familiar with Admiral McCraven.
Okay.
So, you had, you had connected the dots.
Oh, yeah, but not all of them, though.
Okay.
And it's crazy to just hear them all like the Saddam Hussein one.
And it didn't connect those dots before.
The Captain Phillips one, I did not know either.
But, but.
So you had connected one out of the dots.
Yeah, one dot.
As far as, you know, some of the, some of the most important, special operations.
So, awesome to have him on here and to be able to hear some of those stories and thoughts.
So, Admiral McCraven, thank you so much for coming on.
And, what does this mean for us?
Well, means we can do a little bit more.
Means we can certainly, we have work to do.
The work that we have to do starts with us in order to get better.
In order to move in the right direction, echo Charles.
Is there?
He said something that I, I, I feel like I'm going to kind of take this with more of a lot of things.
Obviously, but one that really stood out is, and he said it twice, maybe three times.
Where he's like, my job is to put you set you up for success, right?
Put you in a position where you can succeed, right?
That was his deal.
It's like, man, that's a good way to put it right there.
Because, you know, how you all, it's like, well, hey, don't micromanage.
Don't, you know, you want to let your team lead, you know, how you put it.
And it's like, yeah, if you, because you can apply that to yourself as well.
Like, bro, set yourself up for some success, man.
Sounds like a good plan. You know, go learn some stuff.
Yeah, go, go out, 100%.
That's a great analogy.
And I thought you were going to say when he was talking about, look, guys,
I case, are you got nothing to prove?
Oh, yeah, though.
He says, no, you're wrong, actually.
You got something to prove every day.
And it's interesting, something I used to talk about to the young seal officers is I would say,
you have nothing to prove, but everything to prove.
Because sometimes they think they got to prove that they're in charge,
so they start barking orders at people and, you know,
when he's my plan and all that other stuff.
And you don't have to prove that you're in charge.
We know you're in charge. You're the officer.
You're literally called the officer in charge.
You don't need to prove that.
But you do need to prove.
You did, you, you got a lot to prove.
Yeah, it's like that always struck me as a, like, don't, like, beware of complacency or
resting on your laurels. You know, like, you know, someone who has the over-stated
attitude of, I don't have anything to prove when it's like too much of that right?
Little off balance of the economy kind of thing.
It's kind of like they did something awesome and then they sort of write it out.
And then they still think they should get kind of the crowd for it, like,
a hundred years later or whatever.
And it's like, hey, like, that's cool that you did that,
but, but recently you've been kind of doing nothing kind of an added, you know.
So that's what that always struck me as, where it's like, you always have something to prove.
Like, don't be like, oh, yeah, you should, like, keep respecting me this much
first one, like one thing I did yesterday.
Yeah. Well, you know, 37 years for him in the seal teams in the, in the
military and again, what's, I think is important is as he said,
look, there's so many people that did somewhat have done so much work, so much work
to, to protect America and everybody from, you know,
obviously the seal teams, but just, you know, we talked about the
infrastructure men we talked about everybody, there's so much people that work so hard
to protect freedom. So, I feel like, you know, you have a guy that's a
four star admin along. And of course, you're going to talk about what his
experience is worth. And, you know, he's going to give you his perspective,
but, you know, I try to point out in the beginning, you know,
animal engraving was always connected to the guys on the front lines and the
people that are out there making it happen. So, awesome.
So, we need to set ourselves up for successes, what you were saying before I went on
a little. Yes, sir. What do we got? How can we set ourselves up for success?
Well, big things and small things. And then a lot of, you know,
we're not going to be admiral straight up. I'm not going to be admiral.
It's very unlikely we'll just say that. Okay. So, I'm going to do maybe my
small little part to set myself up for success. Okay, just my small little
part in your world, in my world exactly right. So, what does that look like for me?
And I think others too. So, this is the good news about this, this kind of
stuff is that it's achievable by anyone. Just take a few little steps
out yourself up for success. So, what are we doing reading more? We're working
out more, keeping ourselves physically and mentally capable. That's what it is.
An opportunity presents itself. You want to be physically and mentally capable,
you want to be physically and mentally incapable. That's the question.
Is this a question for me? We want to be capable. Kind of a rhetorical.
Kind of obvious question. So, we do that through working out. We do that through
reading. Pay attention and listening. That's a big one. A lot of us don't do that
that much anymore. Pay attention and listen. Trust me. Kind of like you're not
really listening to me. You're not very easy. You see what I'm saying?
Anyway, on this path that we're doing all this, we do need supplementation.
So, good news. We're going to start with energy drinks. I'm calling it energy
drinks. It's a new wave of energy drinks. Do you think that these energy
drinks that we have created are going to make all other energy drinks obsolete?
It has the potential to do that as a right now. This is kind of a new thing
technically. It seems like that's a pretty obvious course.
People are looking at the old, the dinosaurs. We'll say.
I think in all this dinosaur, it tastes okay and it gives me energy for an hour.
But then I ruined my health and I feel like crap.
Then they look over at this, this, this, this makes me feel a little good.
And it's actually good for me. This is how this is how the old energy
drink dinosaurs are going to go extinct. Yes. They're going extinct.
That looks my predictions. That's my predictions.
The free can big comet just hit or whatever it was.
What killed the dinosaurs? I was in a volcano.
I think it was asteroid. Oh, I think it all. That's the current thing.
The asteroid just hit the other energy drinks in the form of jacquaddiscipline.
Go. Oh, yeah. So they're going down. Just anticipating fall out on the ground.
They're starving. They're dying.
So yeah. So that's what's going on.
Boom. New energy drink. No stigma on this one. No.
No sugar. Sweetened with monk fruit. No unhealthy preservatives. No toxic chemicals.
No preservatives whatsoever.
Yeah. It's pasteurized.
Yeah. Boom. Boom. Manit tastes good. So boom. This thing is good for you straight out.
All upside no downside short term and long term benefits.
Boom. Strategic and tactical discipline. Go.
There's also discipline going powder and capsule format. Don't forget about that one.
Also, we got stuff for you joins. Keep your joints in the game.
Don't have to worry about that anymore. Yes, right. Did squads.
You did squads win Monday, right? There's something like this.
Yeah. I think it was.
So I always think about this where I'm older than I was before.
Mm-hmm.
And so I incorporated the deep squads. Right?
Yeah. From your influence and I thank you for it.
And you think with a deep squads, especially when you go hard, it's like, okay, you know, my knees.
Because that's a lot of times that's the, that's the, what you get.
Like it's like, oh yeah, I did, if you suggest deep squads, so somebody will be all my knees or, you know,
and I get it.
True. So every time I think about this, like this joint stuff, like my joints, I think about the squads.
Got it.
By the way, yes, yesterday, I started warming up to in squads. My brother came over.
Jade, we started to tell you know, you get into conversations, whatever the comment.
And then I went to squads.
So I'm, well, you know, I'm doing the warmups.
Okay.
First, why don't we get in this conversation while I'm warming up?
I do one preset I was explained to Carrie.
I do one preset.
Okay, dog. Okay, dog.
Oh yeah, I'll do it.
And it's basically one set, one, it's like a half working set.
It's like the way that I'm going to use for my first working set.
I do that, but not as many reps as someone.
Yeah, so I'll do it.
It's like a priming kind of thing.
So I do that, right?
Boom, right at that point, the conversation goes deep.
So like, we're just talking two hours, two and a half homeless hours,
before my first set.
Also now you see, you're saying, either there's a two hour lag time.
Like time between my private and private sets.
So, so in my normal course of action, that kind of stuff happened.
This was happening before it was like, hey, my conversation came and
hey, sorry, I skipped the workout.
You know, the sun went down straight up.
It's dark nighttime, ready?
I don't know, eight, 30, maybe.
And it's like, well, you know, I'm all cold.
I've been sitting down talking for two and a half hours.
I'm not warm anymore.
And let's face it, but it's almost bedtime.
Why are people kind of coming around your gym to talk to you?
Like, that's my gym is on the side of my house outside.
Yeah, and you know, hey, that's a conversation for another time.
For sure.
But it's a nifkin.
Nonetheless, so I go inside and I'm like, hey, cool, I'll do the squats tomorrow,
whatever, all good.
So I go inside, I take off my shoes and I'm like, drink some water, whatever.
And Jade's leaving in the front and they leave him like, I was like, no man.
No, it's not going to get me this time.
Conversation, no conversation.
Go back out and finish the whole squat.
Actually, I added one more set to like it by the way.
There you go.
The world right now collectively is celebrating your first season.
Oh yeah, so my dad, ad.
Do I work for?
Do I work?
I was not worried about my joints any at any moment.
My knee joints in this project.
You're worried about his mouth.
I know where I got to curve that little bit.
You got joy warfare on your jaw bone.
Not your jaw bone.
Anyway, success all around, join when for Super Cruil Oil, all day.
Also, we got some immunity stuff.
This is important as well, you don't get sleep.
You were kind of talking about it that morning, getting dressed up
In a couple of I had to messed up sleep schedule past,
not last night, two nights before that.
Yeah, I had one last night.
Anyway, lack of sleep, lack of this, lack of that can kind of
Jam up your immune system to worry about that kind of stuff,
You've got supplements for that.
Good cold war.
Vitamin D3.
Boom.
Don't worry about your moon system either.
Joint immune system, no factor right there.
Also, milk.
Supplemental protein in the form of dessert.
That's some good stuff as well.
Hold on to the story, but good stuff nonetheless.
Yeah, you don't.
Let's face it.
You want ice cream.
Ice cream has a lot of downside to it.
Yes it does.
Have milk all upside, no downside.
Yeah.
Upside legit upside.
So to put that into perspective, and I just heard this, I don't even know where I was listening
to something.
But, and it reminded me, some people eat like a thing of ice cream every single day.
It's like a thing.
You know, like, oh, I ate that for a while.
Every single day.
I remember I was running so much.
I was running so much.
I think it was that.
I was out of teeth too.
And every day was like, okay, Monday, P.T. was like, P.T. and the run.
Tuesday, P.T. was, of course, and the run.
Wednesday was swim and the run.
Thursday was P.T. and the run again.
And then Friday was a run.
What can run?
The Friday run, which Admiral talked about was like a 10 mile or 12 mile.
Sorry.
I was 10 miles per hour.
Yeah, I would come back for that.
I would do my 20 reps squat routine too.
I was eating ice cream with a total of bandages.
Yeah, just get it.
Yeah, so the situation I was hearing about reminded that reminded me of the concept that some
people don't do these crazy runs or workouts or whatever.
It's just part of their normal everyday routine.
Like, hey, let me just eat some ice cream every single day.
You know, some obvious detriment when you do that.
Can stuff.
You drink the oyster.
You replace the ice cream with the milk.
You got the.
You got the same front side.
Yeah, or front end payoff.
Yeah, but away different back in payoff.
Actually, you get a back in payoff unlike the back end of price cost.
Hey, you can get this stuff.
Jockelfield.com.
If you if you subscribe to it, it's free shipping, which is legit thing because right
now there's let's face it.
There's large, rather large, extremely large companies that are trying to lure you in to
their little realm by giving you free shipping.
And we understand that.
We got to compete with them.
So if you subscribe free shipping, you can do double support.
Much appreciated.
Also, we got origin USA.com.
If you need a digital, if you need jeans, if you need boots, if you need a t-shirt,
if you need a belt, you can get it all origin USA.com.
The USA part is not some sort of thrown on branding cool.
No, because the stuff is freaking made in America, 100% without compromise.
Look about that.
We're talking about fighting for America.
Cool.
That's awesome.
We love it.
Guess what else we're going to do?
We're going to support the economy here, because without the American economy, nothing
else matters.
You don't have a military unless you have a good economy.
So support the American economy.
Stuff that's made in America with raw materials that were made or grown or produced in America.
That's what we're doing.
USA.com, get it, it's true.
Also, jocos, or called jocos store.
This is where you can get your just one equals three.
I'm good.
Get after it.
All the, all the representative ideas of the path on your apparel is where you can get it.
Also, we have a subscription as well for shipping on this one.
Only in the USA though.
That's a right now.
But we're working on the International scenario, but only in the USA.
It's called shirt locker.
This is where you can get shirts with a little bit different, more creative.
Same or fun designs for lack of a better way of maybe putting it.
Anyway, they're more interesting.
You get one every month.
It's kind of interesting to be a lighter word.
Because once I get a hold of a couple designs, it's going to be not fun.
It's going to be dark.
It's not fun.
It's going to be more cool.
Well, they're cool right now, but they're light-hearted.
Some of them.
Yes.
People seem to be enjoying them.
So yeah, free shipping on that one.
Yeah, every month is a good one.
Check it out.
If you like it, and get that.
Subscribe to this podcast too.
Wherever you listen to podcasts, don't forget we have a so I have a jockel unraveling
podcast with my man, DC Darryl Cooper.
Put it out word.
Grounded podcast.
We have a warrior kid podcast.
We also have jockel under ground.com.
If you want to get a little additional podcast scenario, you can check that out.
You have to subscribe to it.
It costs $8.18 a month.
What are we doing with that?
Creating a platform of our own that if things go sideways, we got a contingency plan.
We'll meet you in the underground, jockel underground.com.
Come and check that out.
We have a YouTube channel, by the way.
And we make videos.
We make videos.
We have obviously, you all know, Ecos got some technical skills that he can put to
you so he can do the editing and some of that other sort of, sort of, did the just technical
skills.
Then obviously, I come in with the assistant director and I kind of created and the creative
side, the creative element, the vision and the talent, by the way, you're the talent.
But I do appreciate you're being able to edit properly.
So if you want to see Ecos edits and my vision, check out.
Speaking of jockel's vision and my lack of vision from time to time, psychological warfare,
the novel, with tracks of jockel telling you how to skip, not skip, not skip, not skip.
Okay.
Workouts if you're in the mood to skip or work out.
Like basically to achieve what I achieved last night, let's say you don't have that
forwarded to that day.
Don't worry, jockel got you on this one.
This goes for a lot of other weaknesses as well.
So check that one out.
Psychological warfare.
If you want a little spot, psychological spot getting over the hesitation, check out
flipsidecampus.com to code to my brother.
He's making cool stuff to hang on your wall also named America.
We got some books.
You heard about some of them today.
Spec ops.
These are from Admo William H. McRaven.
We got Spec ops.
We got Make Your Bed.
We got C stories and we got the latest, the hero code.
Those are available on our website.
If you go to jockelpontcast.com and you click on books from the podcast, they'll all be there.
That's also way to support, too, by the way.
We got final spin.
This is my book that's coming out.
You're going to want that first edition.
You're going to want the first edition.
Order that right now, the publishers.
We are in America.
You're not really a fiction writer.
We don't know people are probably not going to appreciate your work.
They're more looking for, that's what they're saying.
We're like, okay, we'll print a limited number of copies.
Technically aren't you a fictional writer?
Yes, because I've written a bunch of fiction kids books.
You want to correct?
I made that point as well.
And then they said that.
They can't find a fake answer.
Good.
So, look, book comes out.
We got to let them know at least to print enough.
So, if you want to preorder that one, you get that first edition.
Go ahead and make that happen.
That's final spin.
That's your strategy in tax-field manual.
The code the evaluation approach call, which also, yeah, that's another code.
I forgot to mention that one today.
The code the evaluation approach call, this one is freedom field manual.
Where the word get 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Mike in the dragons about face by hack worth extreme ownership.
And that I got to meet a leadership which I wrote with my brother, Lave Babin.
Lave Babin also have a leadership consultancy.
We saw problems through leadership.
Go to asklomfront.com.
If you need us to come and help you in your organization, we have,
we have extreme ownership, a Academy, online leadership training.
Get to the leadership gym.
Get to the, hey, you don't go to a gym one time, work out, and then you're good.
No, you got to say, healthy, you got to maintain that strength.
Just sure.
So, go to extremownership.com.
Join our online.
We're doing it.
By the way, you got questions.
Come and ask me the question.
I will be on a Zoom call.
Literally ask answering your question.
Come and check it out.
We have a live event called the Mustard.
Next one up is Phoenix August 17th and then Las Vegas, October 28th and 29th.
Check extremownership.com.
For that as well, all those have sold out by the way.
And this one will too.
These will too.
We have a couple other events.
You can check out Battlefield.
We go Battlefield Walks.
We have FTX.
And if you want to help service members active and retired their families, Gold Star
family, check out Mark Lee's mom, mom Lee.
She's got a charity organization.
Helps out our warriors.
If you want to donate or you want to get involved, go to America's MightyW warriors.org.
And if you want, look, if you want more of my over-alabrated estimations or you need more
of Echo's disoriented discourse.
You can find us on the in-web's.
On Twitter, on Instagram, which Echo only refers to as the gram and on Facebook, Echo's
at Echo Charles.
And I am at Jockel Willingck.
And thanks once again to Admiral McCraven for everything too much to sum up.
Thanks to all the soldiers, sailors, and random Marines who have been on the battlefield.
Well, for hundreds of years, and who allow America and freedom and democracy to exist.
And the same goes to our police and law enforcement, firefighters, paramedics, EMTs, dispatchers,
correctional officers, board of patrol secret service and all first responders.
Thank you for your protection here at home.
And everyone else out there, I didn't quite get into it to this book that he wrote code.
And Admiral McCraven gives some guidance on how a hero should live.
But another thing that he indicates is that you are the hero we need.
It's you to go out there and get after it.
Then until next time, this is Echo and Jockel.
MUSIC